Inside the Cutthroat World of Morning TV, by Brian Stelter, Hardcover, 312 pages | purchase, More on this book:, Last spring, what NBC fondly refers to as America's First Family went through a very public divorce. Ann Curry, who spent more than a decade as a news anchor on the Today show and less than a year as a host, was unexpectedly axed. For all of you who saw me as a groundbreaker, Curry said with emotion in her last morning broadcast, I'm sorry I couldn't carry the ball over the finish line. But man, I did try., Brian Stelter writes about that precipitous moment in his new book, Top of the Morning: Inside the Cutthroat World of Morning TV. Stelter, a media reporter for The New York Times, joined NPR's David Greene to talk about the high stakes in the world of morning television., On why Today's dismissal of Ann Curry was a watershed moment , The show had this incredible streak for about 16 years. It had never happened before in television, and it probably never will again. The Today show started beating Good Morning America in 1995 and then beat it every single week until 2012. And it started to lose to GMA at the same time it was thinking about removing Ann Curry. They may have thought that by removing her last year, they would get back to No. 1. But in fact, the opposite happened. They fell further in to second place, and they haven't been able to get out of second place since., On television networks as boys' clubs, It is surprising to what degree these shows are still produced mostly by men, even though they're made mostly for women. It's a strange situation that I think does contribute to some of the problems that happened at the Today show last year. Some of this was just a PR mistake they didn't come out and be accountable. They didn't come out and talk about why they made these decisions., But there is a woman in charge of NBC News now, for the first time pretty much ever in the history of the news division. And I have to say the show has made a lot of smart steps since then. It may be a coincidence, but I don't think it is., Brian Stelter is a reporter at The New York Times and was the founder of the website TVNewser., On growing up watching morning television, I always watched the Today show; my mom always watched Good Morning America. So it was this battle in the house, which I think is like a lot of homes. People have really personal choices they make in the morning. In fact, Morning Edition is one of them. Today, Good Morning America, Fox and Friends, Squawk Box, Morning Joe we feel that we really know the people that join us in the morning for these shows, and that's why it's such an interesting and fraught time of day., On the financial pressures in morning television, In this fragmenting media world, if you can have the most viewers, then you're going to be able to charge a premium. And that's what the Today show and Good Morning America can do. If you can get about 100,000 more women ages 25 to 54 to watch your program in the morning, that's worth about $10 million in advertising revenue. And if you lose 100,000 [women], you're losing that much advertising revenue., I think this is something that most viewers and readers don't understand, which is that NBC's Nightly News, ABC's World News, CBS's CBS Evening News, all these programs are in effect subsidized by the morning shows, because the morning shows really bring in the bulk of the revenue, and help to provide crews out in the field, covering news for the other programs., On how the cutthroat competition will change programming, &ldquo; People like to wake up with someone or some group of people in the morning. ... There's a lot of companionship that comes from morning television, and that's why I think they'll be with us for a long time, even if they're being delivered to us in different ways., - Brian Stelter, What we saw with Good Morning America the last two years is a pivot more toward entertainment, to the viral videos and the silly, cute animals. The Today show has tried to resist going in that direction ... When we wake up with our cellphones in the morning and we see the headlines on our phone, and we see the weather, and we see the traffic, what's the point of morning television? Maybe it's going to more about the fun and the friendliness of the cast, delivering you news and delivering you entertainment in a way that makes you comfortable as you're getting dressed and getting ready for work., On whether morning television will endure, I think for as long as we wake up in the morning, we will have morning television. Now, it may be morning video on our cellphones or on our Google Glasses, but people like to wake up with someone or some group of people in the morning. They like to feel like they're joined by a larger family. There's a lot of companionship that comes from morning television, and that's why I think they'll be with us for a long time, even if they're being delivered to us in different ways.
Passengers check their flight status at Los Angeles International airport on Monday. The FAA said staffing cuts were causing delays in the Eastern U.S., Passengers check their flight status at Los Angeles International airport on Monday. The FAA said staffing cuts were causing delays in the Eastern U.S., Some air travelers faced delays Monday as furloughs of air traffic controllers began taking effect., The Federal Aviation Administration said that with fewer eyes on the skies, it was forced to delay some flights. Travelers checking the FAA website saw alerts such as: Due to STAFFING, there is a Traffic Management Program in effect for traffic arriving Charlotte Douglas International Airport, Charlotte, NC (CLT). This is causing some arriving flights to be delayed an average of 22 minutes., The delays left many travelers fuming, and wondering: What the heck is going on?, Here are answers to read on your smartphone as you sit, tapping your foot, in an airport terminal., Why did the FAA furlough air traffic controllers?, Last week, FAA Administrator Michael Huerta told a Senate committee that he had no choice, thanks to the automatic spending cuts set into motion by the sequestration process. That's a reference to congressionally mandated, across-the-board spending cuts that began taking hold March 1., The sequester is requiring the FAA to make significant cuts in services and investments, Huerta said. To stay within its reduced budget, the FAA must furlough 47,000 workers for up to 11 unpaid days between now and the fiscal year's end on Sept. 30. That includes nearly 15,000 flight controllers and other workers needed to keep flights moving smoothly., Why do furloughs cause delays?, Each furloughed employee must skip one day of work for every two-week pay period. To avoid overloading the remaining controllers, the FAA is allowing fewer departures and landings, particularly during prime times such as mornings when lots of business travelers want to take off. That led to flight delays Monday in areas with crowded airspace, like the New York area., When did the furloughs begin, and what has happened so far?, The FAA began enforcing the furloughs Sunday. For most of the country, the weather was good and air traffic was light, so delays weren't too bad., But on Monday morning, the delays started to cascade at some East Coast airports. The FAA's flight tracking map showed lots of holdups in that crowded stretch of airspace from New York's LaGuardia airport to Baltimore-Washington International airport. But the total number of delays tied directly to the staffing problems wasn't clear yet., Are these cuts really necessary?, The Obama administration's Department of Transportation says the FAA has no choice. At a press briefing Monday, White House spokesman Jay Carney said, Furloughs cannot be avoided 70 percent of the FAA's operations budget is personnel., But critics don't see it that way. They think the White House is using high-visibility cuts to draw attention to the downsides of sequestration., For example, Republican Rep. Bill Shuster of Pennsylvania, who chairs the House Transportation Committee, insists in a statement that the FAA has the flexibility to reduce costs elsewhere, such as contracts, travel, supplies, and consultants, or to apply furloughs in a manner that better protects the most critical air traffic control facilities., What are the airlines saying?, Representatives of major airlines and unionized pilots have been condemning the furloughs. At a press conference Friday, Nicholas Calio, who heads the industry trade group named Airlines For America, called the furloughs unjust, unnecessary and completely irresponsible., So what happens next?, The airlines' trade group on Friday filed a motion in the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, seeking an emergency stay to end the furloughs. The court denied an immediate injunction, but the airlines are pursuing the underlying lawsuit. The court has not yet set a schedule for oral arguments., In the meantime, the industry is trying to build political pressure to force the White House to shift the cuts to other areas of the FAA budget. It has launched an online campaign, DontGroundAmerica.com, to urge people to contact Congress and the White House to complain about the furloughs., At this point, it's unclear whether anything can be done to stop the furloughs until the next FAA budget takes effect Oct. 1.
Reshaping the Future of People, Nations and Business, by Eric Schmidt and Jared Cohen, Hardcover, 315 pages | purchase, More on this book:, Imagine a world with machines that wash, press and dress you on the way to work and vacations via hologram visits to exotic beaches. In his new book, The New Digital Age, Google Executive Chairman Eric Schmidt does just that but it's no gee-whiz Jetsons fantasy., Schmidt partners up with Jared Cohen, a foreign policy counterterrorist specialist poached from the State Department now working for Google Ideas. Together they forecast a raft of new innovations and corresponding threats that will arise for dictatorships, techno revolutionaries, terrorists and you., Cohen and Schmidt chatted with NPR's Audie Cornish about negotiating the shifting balance between privacy and security in a rapidly changing technological landscape., On the cost in privacy to everyday users of the latest technology, Cohen: Obviously, there's a lot of conversation about both privacy and security in the context of the first 2 billion Internet users. But what the two of us did as we traveled around the world is we wanted to understand what privacy and security issues might look like in environments where the next 5 billion people come online. And it becomes very interesting when you go to places like Myanmar and North Korea and Saudi Arabia and Libya, and start having conversations about privacy and security., Schmidt: One of our core concerns is that unless people fight for privacy, they will lose it in countries which have no history of concern over privacy. In the Western world, the governments will ultimately figure out a balance between these two: the legitimate use ... by the police of this kind of information, and the incorrect use by others. But in many countries, there's no history of privacy at all, and so the government can go in and essentially create a police state without any protections for citizens, and no one will even notice. And once those systems are in place in those countries, it'll be difficult to reform them., On educating the next generation of Internet users, Jared Cohen is the director of Google Ideas and an adjunct fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations., Jared Cohen is the director of Google Ideas and an adjunct fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations., Cohen: Whether you're in New York or Saudi Arabia or a part of Asia, educating the next generation as they're coming online young and fast is going to be important, regardless of what kind of society it is ... it's actually going to be relevant years before it's relevant to talk about the birds and the bees., Schmidt: So the parent sits there and says, 'There's really no delete button for what my 10-year-old or 11-year-old is about to post, and I really don't want this following them for the next 50 years.' , On privacy-related lawsuits against Google, and whether the increase in such suits is just a cost of doing business now, Eric Schmidt was the CEO of Google for 10 years. He is currently Google's executive chairman and the chairman of the board of The New America Foundation., Eric Schmidt was the CEO of Google for 10 years. He is currently Google's executive chairman and the chairman of the board of The New America Foundation., Schmidt: I think it is. In Google's case, we do in fact have this information. It's important that we respect the way we collect it, and the purpose we've collected it for. In fact, the lawsuits in Europe are about the fact that we in fact published ... the ways in which we would use this information, and people want even more disclosure, and we're arguing over how much disclosure is necessary. We think we've done enough. But the fact of the matter is that Google has a huge responsibility to maintain your information, keep it under your control and not misuse it, and we try very very hard to achieve that., On embedding privacy concerns in new technologies, Historically, technology people have always assumed that the networks were full of good people people like themselves ... in fact, the initial Internet structures didn't even have passwords. That's how simple or simpleton our model of the world was. Well, of course, we've all grown up now, and we understand that the Internet has bad people as well as good people, and people who want to misuse things, people who want to take advantage of others and steal things and so forth., Now, when products are being developed, Google and this is true of other companies, as well have sophisticated compliance and legal policies, to make sure that the products not only respect the letter of the law, but also the spirit of our privacy policies and the things that we care about. And I can tell you there have been many, many product reviews at Google where somebody came in with an idea, and we held it, or we pushed it back, and we said, 'You haven't addressed this enough.' ... The technology naturally collects information, because of the way the computers work, and it's important to understand what you're keeping and what you're not keeping, and why., On data permanence, Schmidt: From birth till your death now, going forward, your online profile will be shaped more and more by online events, what people say about you, and it will be very difficult for you to control that. And so the reality is that a child growing up today will find more and more of the things said about them and the things they do accumulate over time. What we're seeing is, in one generation we're going from a very small number of people having access to information, to almost everyone having access to the entire world's information. That will change almost everything., We believe that these problems can be solved, and one of the great things about our society is that you can write these predictions out, and people will attack them and they will solve them., Cohen: Because of our increased visibility into the world's problems, and because the places where these problems are most serious are coming online, we wanted to talk about both the good and the ill that awaits us, because we can't sit back and pretend that only the optimistic things are relevant to us.
If you:, 1. Live in a state that charges sales tax, and, 2. Buy something from an online store that does not charge you sales tax,, then you are supposed to:, 3. Calculate the sales tax yourself and add it onto your annual state tax bill., Not surprisingly, as we reported last week, almost no one actually does this., As online retailing has grown, sales tax has been a growing issue for state governments, which say billions of dollars a year in sales taxes are going unpaid. Brick-and-mortar stores don't like it either, because it gives online retailers an advantage., But states may soon be able to force out-of-state retailers to charge state and local sales tax. The Hill reports:, The Senate is expected to pass legislation this week that would empower states to tax online purchases., EBay is fighting the bill. The company just sent out tens of millions of emails to its active U.S. sellers, asking them to fight the bill, the WSJ reports. The bill exempts businesses that have less than $1 million a year in sales. EBay wants the exemption to go up to $10 million a year., Amazon, on the other hand, supports the bill. In fact, a company exec wrote a letter to Senators thanking them for introducing the bill., What gives? Why would Amazon be supporting a bill that would require it to charge sales tax, and give up an advantage over local retailers?, There are a couple possible reasons., Reason #1, Collecting state and local sales tax all around the country would require a fair bit of effort on the part of online retailers, because sales tax rules vary from state to state. That's not a huge deal for a giant company like Amazon, but it would be more of a burden for smaller online retailers. From Amazon's point of view, that's a good thing it makes life harder for Amazon's smaller competitors., That's why big businesses, despite what they may say, often like regulations. They make life harder for small, would-be competitors. But in the case of Amazon, this argument is less compelling: Amazon spent years doing everything it could to avoid charging sales tax., Reason #2, Under current law, Internet retailers have to charge sales tax in states where they have a significant physical presence like, say, a big warehouse. For a long time, Amazon kept warehouses out of big states so it could avoid charging sales tax in those states., Brick-and-mortar retailers didn't like this, and started lobbying state governments to push for Amazon to charge sales tax. So Amazon changed its strategy. The company agreed to start paying sales tax in more states and it started building huge warehouses near major metropolitan areas in those states., The warehouses meant the company had to start charging sales tax. But having warehouses closer to big cities also allowed Amazon to start offering same-day delivery to millions of customers., As the FT reported last year, the brick-and-mortar stores got the level playing field they wanted for sales tax. But they also got a new level of competition from Amazon. If the company can make cheap, same-day delivery work, it will eliminate one of the last advantages of physical stores.
An American Airlines passenger is helped at the ticket counter at Miami International Airport last week. Many airline industry observers expect delays to strike Monday, the first full day of FAA furloughs., An American Airlines passenger is helped at the ticket counter at Miami International Airport last week. Many airline industry observers expect delays to strike Monday, the first full day of FAA furloughs., Many airline passengers saw only moderate flight delays stemming from the first full day of furloughs for nearly 15,000 flight controllers and other Federal Aviation Administration workers, as industry analysts' worst fears did not materialize. But the reduced staffing was blamed for some slowdowns, and observers say it also increased the length of unrelated delays., We'll be keeping an eye on possible delays today, and updating this post with new information., Update at 6:45 p.m. ET. Delays Build, Tied To Weather And Furloughs:, The FAA's furloughs didn't bring the massive cascading delays some analysts had feared as of early evening on the East Coast Monday. But many travelers' plans were hampered by delays and cancellations, as rain and windy conditions around New York City forced delays at airports and the rescheduling of flights., Denver International also had problems, stemming from snow and ice. And Charlotte's Douglas International had intermittent delays throughout the day, which worsened in the afternoon., The worst furlough-related delays may have been at Los Angeles International Airport, which reported delays of nearly two hours for arriving flights. The sole reason provided by the FAA was staffing., The FAA says that the furloughs will likely force controllers to put more space between planes, so they can be safely managed, as USA Today reports., The furloughs may continue through September, which could complicate the summer travel season. For more background on the furloughs including a court motion to stop them see this story by NPR's Marylyn Geewax., Update at 3:21 p.m. ET. Few Furlough Delays Seen:, Impact from the furloughs has been neither extreme nor widespread, with busy airports in Chicago, Atlanta, and Los Angeles reporting no or few delays. New York's three big airports experienced delays, but the longest holdups were blamed on high winds and maintenance work, in addition to staffing issues., Baltimore-Washington International Airports in Charlotte and Orlando also reported moderate to heavy delays during the mid-day hours, but they've been sporadic. Our original post continues:, As of 11:45 a.m. Monday, the FAA's U.S. flight-tracking map showed delays of more than an hour at New York's LaGuardia, due to high volume and winds. The FlightAware site reported delays of more than an hour for some inbound flights at John F. Kennedy International Airport, due to runway work. Most other large airports were deemed free of trouble, with some experiencing slight delays., The cuts required by the sequester have forced us to slash contract expenses and furlough 47,000 of our employees, FAA Administrator Michael Huerta told a Senate committee Thursday. He predicted that the agency's handling of air traffic operations would be less efficient, and that there would be less time for safety inspections of new aircraft., Any delays that stem from the FAA furloughs are expected to be the most extreme at the nation's busiest airports, especially those that routinely handle international flights. The FAA recommends getting to the airport two hours before a domestic flight, and three hours before an international trip., If significant delays develop, airlines say they plan to reroute flights and use shuttle buses to get passengers to their destinations or connecting flights., The FAA's furlough plan has drawn criticism from members of Congress, who accuse the agency of mismanaging the budget cuts and hyping their impact., Given that the FAA's budget increased more than 100 percent over the last 15 years, finding five percent in savings shouldn't need to significantly impact our nation's aviation operations, said Rep. Bill Shuster, chairman of the House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure., Airlines, unhappy that the furloughs might cause them to experience cascading delays and to endure frustrated customers' ire have created a website to help the public complain to the FAA., The FAA furloughs, which require employees to stay home from work without pay for one or two days per pay period, are expected to continue until the financial year ends on Sept. 31. The agency says that on any given day, as much as 10 percent of its employees will be off work., The Global Business Travel Association, which bills itself as the voice of the business travel industry, sent a letter to the FAA's Huerta Monday, saying that its nearly 6,000 members are very much alarmed by the list of airports and the expected delays. With Hartsfield-Jackson expected to see maximum delays of 210 minutes and Chicago O'Hare close behind, the impacted airports is a veritable hit list on the business travel industry.
A sale-pending sign is posted in front of a home last month in San Anselmo, Calif., A sale-pending sign is posted in front of a home last month in San Anselmo, Calif., There was a 0.6 percent dip in sales of existing homes in March from February, the National Association of Realtors reports, because the supply of homes for sale has tightened as the number of would-be buyers rises., Its data suggest that sales ran at a 4.92 million annual rate last month, falling from a downwardly revised pace of 4.95 million the month before., According to a statement from NAR chief economist Lawrence Yun, buyer traffic is 25 percent above a year ago when we were already seeing notable gains in shopping activity. But in the same timeframe, he adds, housing inventories have trended much lower, which is continuing to pressure home prices., David Sloan, an economist at 4Cast Inc., tells Bloomberg News that housing will remain a positive for the economy, but there should be some slowing in the next few months. The slowing is temporary. There is a shortage of supply. The housing market will revive.
Amelia Schabel, 23, works with art director Andrew LaBounty at the nonPareil Institute in Plano, Texas., Amelia Schabel, 23, works with art director Andrew LaBounty at the nonPareil Institute in Plano, Texas., The job hunt is complicated enough for most high school and college graduates and even tougher for the growing number of young people on the autism spectrum. Despite the obstacles that people with autism face trying to find work, there's a natural landing place: the tech industry., Amelia Schabel graduated from high school five years ago. She had good grades and enrolled in community college. But it was too stressful. After less than a month she was back at home, doing nothing., I did go to a community college for a semester, but that definitely was not for me, she says., Schabel has Asperger's syndrome, a disorder on the high functioning end of the autism spectrum., NonPariel student and part-time lab assistant Robert Grimes, 22, finishes up a 3-D model for the game he's creating., NonPariel student and part-time lab assistant Robert Grimes, 22, finishes up a 3-D model for the game he's creating., According to the latest figures from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, one in 88 children in the U.S. has an autism spectrum disorder. For people like Schabel, attending college and interacting socially can be tough., I can look someone in the eye and talk to them, she says, but if someone treats me in a way I don't think I deserve to be treated, I'm not going to react well. I may lash out, I may not speak to them, I may just glare., Although symptoms and their severity vary widely, the majority of young adults with autism spectrum disorder won't make it to college and won't get a job after they graduate. This year alone, 50,000 adolescents with autism will turn 18., A Tech Mecca For Young Adults With Autism, Gary Moore wants to make the transition into the workforce easier for young adults on the autism spectrum. Moore, along with his partner Dan Selic, founded the nonPareil Institute in Plano, Texas. It's a combination training program and software company for young adults on the autism spectrum., Schabel, now 23, is one of more than 100 students at nonPareil, training in everything from software programing and digital design to 3-D modeling. She's studying visual art and working on a children's book. Two-dozen young adults with autism work as employees there., Moore's son, Andrew, is a junior in high school and on the autism spectrum. Moore says he used to stay up at night worrying about what would happen to Andrew after graduation., Student Daniel Stanfill, 24, uses a graphics tablet to make digital artwork during lunch at nonPareil., Student Daniel Stanfill, 24, uses a graphics tablet to make digital artwork during lunch at nonPareil., Although [Andrew] can't tie his shoes or buckle his belt to do a lot of things independently, he can do technology, Moore says. He's a digital native., For people like Andrew Moore and Amelia Schabel, high-tech jobs can be a perfect fit. Dr. Patricia Evans, a neurologist at Children's Medical Center in Dallas, says people on the high-functioning end of the autism spectrum often have an amazing ability to hyper-focus on a task., They may really flourish at engineering-type tasks or computer design, where their interaction with people is somewhat limited, Evans says., White-Collar Careers, One Fortune 500 company that has begun hiring people with intellectual disabilities in North Texas is Alliance Data. Jim Pierce, vice president of Corporate Administration, says this is an untapped labor market. He has hired a dozen people with intellectual disabilities., We've got this one guy, for example; his productivity is three times as productive as the person doing his job who did not have cognitive disabilities before him. And his error rate is 2 percent. He is 98 percent accurate. He's a phenomenal worker, Pierce says., Pierce thinks it won't be long before more companies realize they're missing out on a hiring opportunity. In the meantime, nonPareil is trying to keep up with growing demand for training and jobs in Texas. It's looking to build more campuses in Fort Worth, and eventually in Silicon Valley, Calif.
Confusion over the details of the new health care law is leaving many people vulnerable to con artists. Evelyne Lois Such, 86, was recently the target of an attempted scam., Confusion over the details of the new health care law is leaving many people vulnerable to con artists. Evelyne Lois Such, 86, was recently the target of an attempted scam., One recent morning, Evelyne Lois Such was sitting at her kitchen table in Denver when the phone rang. Such, who's 86, didn't recognize the phone number or the deep voice on the other end of the line., He asked, 'Are you a senior?' and I said yes, and he said, 'Well, we are sending out all new Medicare cards, and I want to make sure I have all your statistics just correct,' Such recalls., At first, the caller didn't seem too fishy. He started by running through her address and phone number, just to make sure they were right. But then he read off a series of numbers and asked if it was her bank routing number., I didn't know really at the time whether it was or not, but I just said no, she says. The man pressed her for the number. Well, could you give it to me so I'll have it correctly? she recalls him saying. She hesitated, then hung up., When the scammer called her a second time, she hung up immediately, scribbled down the number from her caller ID and dialed Medicare to report him., I kind of thought it was funny at first, and then I thought, you know, how dare they? Such says. There are some seniors who aren't well, and don't think as well as they used to, and it just made me angry that they would be victimized like that., Law enforcement agencies are reporting an increase in these sorts of health insurance scams across the country. Many of the fraudsters seem to be preying on the public's confusion over the massive changes taking place in the nation's health care system., Seniors are often targets they're more likely to be home to answer the phone, and they tend to have retirement savings that scammers hope to tap. But they aren't the only victims: The federal government received nearly 83,000 complaints of these types of scams last year up 12 percent from the year before., America is rife with health scams, says James Quiggle, communications director at the Coalition Against Insurance Fraud in Washington, D.C. Crooks are offering fake health coverage, stripped-down policies masquerading as real coverage. They're also selling what they're lying is fake Obamacare coverage, he explains., Recent polls have found that well over half of Americans say they still don't understand how the new health law will affect them. Crooks are playing on that confusion. Confusion is a crook's best friend, says Quiggle., Fraudsters are as attuned to what's going on in the news as anybody else, says Lois Greisman, who runs the division of marketing practices at the Federal Trade Commission. Before Katrina hit land, websites were up soliciting funds to help victims of Katrina. This is not a surprise; this is par for the course., A program as vast as the health care overhaul makes for a dangerous twist on the regular scams, she adds., Greisman and her team are working to take down health care scams as quickly as possible, but there are an endless number of them. Scammers range from just your average amateur looking to make a quick buck, to well-organized crime rings that mass-produce fraud., The first line of defense is don't take a call from out of the blue from anyone who's offering to help you navigate the new health care market, cautions Greisman. Those kinds of cold calls just shouldn't take place same thing with an unsolicited email, an unsolicited text., Many people see through those sorts of simple scams, says Sally Hurme, an elder law attorney at AARP. But even if one in a thousand falls for the scam and gives up info or agrees to send information off to who knows where, they've made [the scammer's] day. That's what their job is, says Hurme. As the Affordable Care Act ramps up, the country is likely to see more frequent insurance scams, and they're likely to get more sophisticated, she adds., Savvy senior Evelyne Lois Such offers this advice for others who get a suspicious call: Don't answer too quickly, think about the answer you give them and what they're asking. And never give any personal or financial information over the phone., Better yet? Just hang up.
This Seattle building, a project by the Bullitt Foundation, is said to be the world's greenest office building. It uses a weather station to conserve energy, creates lighting via photovoltaic cells on the roof and features composting toilets., One of the world's greenest office buildings formally open its doors Monday Earth Day. It's a project of the environmentally progressive Bullitt Foundation. Its ambition is bold: to showcase an entirely self-sustaining office building hoping that others will create similar projects., The first thing that strikes you about the new Bullitt Center is the windows. Walking up to the building in Seattle's Capitol Hill neighborhood, six stories of floor-to-ceiling glass soars above you., And there's an emphasis on walking up to the building there's no on-site parking. Once inside, there's more walking., In a building this size, any place else in Seattle it would have two elevators, and that's what would face you as you walked in the front door. Here, the stairway is obvious and it's attractive, says Denis Hayes, president and CEO of the foundation., He explains there is an elevator, but it's tucked away. The staircase encourages exercise and the concept saves money both in energy use and construction costs., Integrating Green Technology, This is one of dozens of decisions and trade-offs that went into this building a building Hayes describes as a living organism., It has eyes, it has ears, it has a nervous system, it has a brain and it responds to its environment in a way that seeks to optimize things, he says., He points across the street to a mini weather station. It sends data to the building so it can decide what it should do to maximize comfort and conserve energy., Hayes says the building customizes windows and external shutter positions so natural lighting can be maximized to its potential and give you day lighting at your desk., Just about everything in this building is off-the-shelf technology from composting toilets to photovoltaic cells, which create electricity from sunlight, on the roof. But never before has all this technology been integrated into a single building quite this way., I think it's fair to say we were all a bit skeptical in the beginning, says Chris Rogers, the founding partner of Point 32, the firm that developed the $30 million project in conjunction with the foundation., Photovoltaic cells on the office building's roof., Photovoltaic cells on the office building's roof., Rogers and the others set out to meet the rigorous goals of the Living Building Challenge including total self sufficiency in energy, water use and building materials that are free of toxics., Down here in the basement is where you'll find the majority of the building's systems our composting toilets system, our underground water storage cistern, he explains., Tenants And Energy Budgets, But beyond the systems, the 160 or so people working inside will have a huge role in meeting the sustainability targets. The foundation occupies half of the top floor; the rest of the building is being leased out., The rent is at market rate for a top-tier building, though many amenities you might expect for the price don't exist. And tenants have to live within an energy budget., Rob Pena with the University of Washington's Integrated Design Lab says energy use can be measured down to an individual socket., That's quite unusual, Pena says. There probably isn't a building in the country that's metered to the level this building is metered., Clearly this building is not for everyone., If you think of it as simply an office building, it was relatively expensive to design and build. But if you view it as a laboratory, an educational center and a bold effort to change how things are built, the calculus changes., 'The Market Has Changed', Still, one could ask, is it possible to replicate the self-sustaining features at a reasonable cost?, If this building isn't replicable, then this experiment will have failed, says Rogers, the developer., But if it is successful, he's optimistic others will follow the foundation's lead., Rogers points out that over the past couple of decades, many builders began incorporating green elements into their buildings., And Chris Cole, a construction cost analyst at the global engineering firm AECOM, says the industry has incorporated the use of green technology., The market has changed, he says. The market started to expect new buildings to have some of these features, he says., And the supply chain began to adapt. New products and services were created and some costs began to fall. Cole believes the Bullitt project could foster additional shifts in the marketplace as business and organizations seek to clean up their footprint., Trade-offs between cost, fancy features and sustainability will undoubtedly be made, and developers and tenants will make those decisions differently., Still, the Bullitt Foundation is encouraged by all the attention its building is getting from people around the world.
A part of a charred battery from a Japan Airlines 787 on display at the NTSB headquarters in January., A part of a charred battery from a Japan Airlines 787 on display at the NTSB headquarters in January., The Federal Aviation Administration has approved changes to the design of the Boeing 787's battery system the first step toward returning the grounded aircraft to service., The approximately 50 787 Dreamliners delivered to airlines worldwide were grounded in January after incidents involving overheating problems in lithium-ion batteries., A team of FAA certification specialists observed rigorous tests we required Boeing to perform and devoted weeks to reviewing detailed analysis of the design changes to reach this decision, FAA Administrator Michael Huerta said in a statement released Friday., According to The New York Times, the aircraft maker's fix for the battery problem includes more insulation between each of the eight cells in the batteries. The batteries will also be encased in a new steel box designed to contain any fire and vent possible smoke or hazardous gases out of the planes., As NPR science correspondent Christopher Joyce reported in January, lithium-ion batteries produce twice the voltage that traditional batteries produce, and when they go bad, that power turns to heat. In a small battery, it's not much of a concern, but in larger batteries it's harder to dissipate the heat.
Are you thinking healthy and nutritious?, Are you thinking healthy and nutritious?, Alarmed by a nation that increasingly equates fresh with healthy, the frozen food industry has a message for you., What we call fresh in the supermarket is really better termed raw, says Kristin Reimers, a registered dietitian and manager of nutrition for ConAgra Foods. A lot of times, those vegetables have been transported for days, and then sit. It could be a matter of weeks between when they're picked and consumed., Frozen vegetables, she says, are probably more nutrient-rich than many of the raw vegetables in the produce section., We called Reimers after seeing that the frozen food industry just hired two big ad agencies for a $50 million campaign to convince us that frozen food is good., ConAgra is one member of the new Frozen Food Roundtable, along with General Mills, Heinz, Kellogg and other big manufacturers. They have ordered up a campaign designed to change the way consumers think and feel about frozen food by promoting positive messaging regarding the benefits and attributes of frozen food, according to Ad Age., We're going to do this in a way that hasn't been done before, says Corey Henry, vice president of communications at the American Frozen Food Institute, which hosts the Roundtable. He told The Salt: You've had various voices weighing in here and there on the value of frozen. Here, frozen food manufacturers are united to weigh in in a comprehensive fashion., The campaign should launch later this year, Henry says., We at The Salt have plenty of frozen vegetables in our home freezers: Brussels sprouts and kale and lima beans, to name just a few. And the Science Desk freezer is full of single-serve meals that people have stashed for lunch on deadline. So we figure this is not an industry on the ropes., Indeed, frozen vegetables remain popular, racking up $5.7 billion in sales last year, up about 1 percent. Frozen fruit sales totaled $422 million, up 8 percent, according to AFFI. And frozen breakfast items have been posting robust sales., But in an era when even Wendy's is advertising always fresh, never frozen, producers worry that longevity and convenience are no longer selling points, particularly among 35- to 44-year-olds., One industry survey found that people are more positive about frozen vegetables than they are about frozen entrees, with significant concerns with the nutritional value and a general feeling that frozen foods are not as good as fresh, according to Ad Age., Newer technologies like steaming and special baking trays have made frozen foods taste fresher, and reduced problems from inconsistent heating in microwaves, Reimers says., Studies comparing the nutrient content of frozen vegetables with fresh find that frozen ones are almost as good. But there are plenty of variables, including how long fresh vegetables have been stored since picking, how long their frozen counterparts have been interred in the home freezer, and how both types are cooked., In a visionary video that ConAgra posted on YouTube last month, two women text each other as each heads off to the farmers market to buy fresh veggies. Oh, my gosh, I almost forgot about this work party tonight! Jen texts from amid the broccoli., I know! I was just about to grab fresh vegetables to go with dinner tonight but running short of time now, Shana texts back., Shana abandons the farmers market, heads to the store and buys Healthy Choice Top Chef Chicken Margherita with Balsamic. What the ad doesn't note is that the meal has 310 calories, 8 grams of fat and 600 milligrams of sodium 25 percent of the daily recommended maximum., Jen abandons the farmers market, heads to the store and buys Marie Callender's Chicken and Broccoli Alfredo. (FYI: It gets 100 of its 350 calories from fat, and has 970 milligrams of sodium 40 percent of the daily maximum.) Then she tops that off with Marie Callender's Peanut Butter Cream Pie, with 600 calories and a whopping 44 grams of fat., Maybe ConAgra needs fictional shoppers who make healthier choices. Or maybe the frozen food industry really needs that $50 million image makeover.
American Airlines passengers wait in line for a flight at Miami International Airport on Tuesday., American Airlines passengers wait in line for a flight at Miami International Airport on Tuesday., American Airlines has promised passengers that Wednesday's flight schedule will be nothing like the day before, when thousands were stranded due to a glitch in the reservations system that forced hundreds of flights to be canceled or delayed., American Airlines and American Eagle scuttled 970 flights and delayed more than 1,000 others Tuesday, The Associated Press said, citing flight-tracking service FlightAware.com., Despite the magnitude of today's disruption, we are pleased to report that we expect our operation to run normally with only a small number of flight cancelations, Andrea Huguely, a spokeswoman for American, told the AP late Tuesday. She said American would add flights to accommodate stranded passengers., American CEO Tom Horton, in a statement on YouTube, said the airline does have redundancies in our systems, but that unfortunately in this case we had a software issue that impacted both our primary and backup systems., According to the AP:, The computer outage began snarling operations around mid-morning. Eventually the Federal Aviation Administration issued a so-called ground stop for American Airlines jets around the country. ..., By late afternoon, American resumed international flights and those from its major hub airports. It scrambled during the evening to put planes and crews in position to get off to a good start on Wednesday morning., American apologized for the inconvenience to passengers and offered to change customer reservations with no charge if their travel plans were flexible, according to the Fort Worth Star-Telegram.
Google co-founder Sergey Brin shows off Google Glass in February. Brin says the camera displays an external light when filming, making it difficult for a user to record surreptitiously., Google co-founder Sergey Brin shows off Google Glass in February. Brin says the camera displays an external light when filming, making it difficult for a user to record surreptitiously., Google Glass is no longer merely a prototype. The company began delivering its high-tech glasses to a select group of test customers Tuesday., The gadget looks kind of like a pair of eyeglasses, except it doesn't always have lenses and it has a tiny screen, about the size of the end of my pinkie, perched just above and to the right of the wearer's right eye., When the screen is off, it's completely transparent and out of my line of sight. When on, it looks well, I'll let Steve Lee, who helped create Google Glass, explain it: Imagine you are sitting on your couch at home and you look across the living room and you look at your TV. That's roughly the size of what the display looks like with Glass., A Google staff member shows a Google Glass customer color options on Tuesday. The company selected most of the test group members based on their ideas for using the gadget., Except it feels much more intimate than that. The picture is right there, an inch from my eye, along with a touch pad that runs along my temple., Glass understands some voice commands, like giving directions and answering questions you'd normally Google. It reads your texts aloud in your ear and lets you respond just by talking., But, first and foremost, Glass is a camera mounted right above your eye., Let's say I'm not very good at cooking and I might need to call ... Mom to get some help, Lee explains. While I'm in the kitchen with my hands busy preparing the food ... my mom can actually see what I am doing to coach him through dinner., Glass does almost everything a smartphone does, hands-free. But Google is not selling it to the public yet. Just 10,000 people have won the right to pay $1,500 for a pair. Most of them earned this privilege by telling Google the creative things they'd like to do with Glass., Dan McLaughlin, who picked up his set Tuesday, has about 30 or 40 ideas, he says, including creating a personal teleprompter. And Monica Wilkinson says getting Glass feels a little like getting a superpower., I have always wanted a computer in my head, basically, she says, so this is like the first step. She plans to build an app to help her remember people's names at parties., But a lot of people have asked me: Is Glass creepy? So I posed the question, nicely, to Google co-founder Sergey Brin. Will this technology push us irreversibly closer to a total surveillance society?, It's definitely something we think about, Brin says. For one thing, there are thousands of products on the market that would be better for recording surreptitiously than this would be. And we have also tried to design the experience so it is clear what you are doing., To snap a photo, you tell Glass to take it, and the display above your eye lights up for all to see., It's really a device that wants to be outdoors, wants to be outside, wants to be with family and friends, Brin says., But mostly, Brin says, he's eager to see what thousands of creative people will do with it.
American Airlines flights were grounded for two hours on Tuesday due to a glitch in the reservation system, the airline says., American Airlines flights were grounded for two hours on Tuesday due to a glitch in the reservation system, the airline says., A computer glitch in the reservations system at American Airlines caused all of the carrier's flights to be grounded for at least two hours on Tuesday., American's reservation and booking tool, Sabre is offline, American Airlines spokeswoman Mary Frances Fagan told Reuters in an email. We're working to resolve the issue as quickly as we can. We apologize to our customers for any inconvenience., NPR's Wade Goodwyn reports that the outage was announced about 2:30 p.m. Eastern time., On Twitter, American wrote: We're currently unable to modify today's reservations. However, when able, we'll offer refunds or update travel at no charge. It said flights would be held at airports until at least 5 p.m. ET., In the next few hours, thousands of passengers were stuck on planes and in terminals as American worked frantically to get their network system back online. By 4:30 p.m., Goodwyn reports, passengers were again boarding flights., According to The New York Times, the outage with the reservation system meant that gate agents could not print boarding passes., Sabre, meanwhile, said the issue did not come from its own computer systems. Other airlines, including Southwest Airlines and JetBlue, use Sabre and have not experienced any outages, said Nancy St. Pierre, a spokeswoman for Sabre., At Dallas-Forth Worth International Airport, thousands of passengers were stranded waiting for flights, some of which were being canceled. Some passengers described being stuck for long stretches on planes on the runway unable to take off or, having landed, initially unable to get to a gate.
A home under construction in Provo, Utah, earlier this year., A home under construction in Provo, Utah, earlier this year., There was a 7 percent surge in housing starts last month, the Census Bureau and Department of Housing and Urban Development report., As The Associated Press notes, the pace of construction 1.04 million starts, at an annual rate is the fastest in nearly five years and is another sign that the housing sector continues to recover from its 2007-08 crash., Also Tuesday morning, the Bureau of Labor Statistics said consumer prices fell 0.2 percent in March. The driving factor was a 4.4 percent plunge in gas prices.
Amazon doesn't charge sales tax in most states but you may still be on the hook to pay the tax., Amazon doesn't charge sales tax in most states but you may still be on the hook to pay the tax., The majority of Americans have now filed their taxes. And the majority of Americans have done so incorrectly., There is one mistake, in particular, that lots of people made: They bought tax-free things online or in another state and they failed to pay tax on their purchase in their home state., It's called a use tax. As far as I can tell, accountants and tax lawyers are some of the only people who pay it., Forty-five states have a use tax. About 1.6 percent of the taxpayers in those 45 states actually pay the use tax. So I figured I'd ask a representative of that particular 1.6 percent to explain this thing most of us are supposed to be doing every year., Its a lot of fun, Daniel Gottfried, a lawyer at Rogin Nassau in Connecticut, told me. I go through my credit card receipts ... page by page., He finds something he bought from Amazon last May for $22.98. He didn't get charged sales tax on the purchase, which means he owes the state of Connecticut $1.40 for that purchase., Gottfried spends hours adding up all these charges in a spreadsheet. He not only has to find all his online purchases; he has to figure out which online sellers already charged him sales tax, and which didn't., He owes the use tax for the online retailers that didn't already charge him. But, this being the tax code, there are exceptions for everything from college textbooks to firearm safety devices., He started buying diapers from Diapers.com last year. Are diapers exempt from the tax?, Medical goods like disposable pads for incontinence are exempt, he says, but I don't think my baby is incontinent. I think he's just a baby who needs diapers., There's a rumor floating around among Connecticut tax professionals that the state's tax department would love to nail a tax lawyer or CPA on use taxes someone they could easily prove was aware of the use tax and did not pay it., But when I brought up the idea with Kevin Sullivan, the commissioner of Connecticut's Department of Revenue, he laughed it off., I don't think we have any particular plan to single out any class or caste of taxpayers, he said., Like most states, Connecticut rarely goes after anyone for use tax violation, Sullivan told me. But, he said, the expectation that taxpayers would voluntarily go through all the trouble of calculating what they owe is completely reasonable. In fact, he says, figuring out what you owe and paying your debt is the foundation of the US tax system., But states seem to be abandoning the idea that people will pay the use tax. Instead, states are trying to force online retailers to collect sales tax. If they can do it, they could bring in an extra $11.4 billion a year.
Doc's Draft hard cider, bottled in Warwick, N.Y., stands to benefit from new regulations proposed by Sen. Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., Doc's Draft hard cider, bottled in Warwick, N.Y., stands to benefit from new regulations proposed by Sen. Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., Is small-batch hard apple cider the next microbrew? It seems everybody and their brother is experimenting with ways to make the potent stuff profitable. Sales of domestically produced hard cider have more than tripled since 2007, according to beverage industry analysts and that's not counting Europe, where it has held a steady popularity for centuries., But there's a bit of a hitch that may stunt cider's future growth. Apple blight? Climate change? Finicky millennial tastes? Well, maybe, but Sen. Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., is focusing on the antiquated way the products are taxed., Schumer, the man who never misses the chance to promote his state's agriculture (have you seen the video of him cooking for the presidential inaugural ceremonies?), is proposing legislation he says will supercharge the cider boom for both the Empire State and the whole country., New York is the second-largest apple producer in the country, and there's no doubt it should be at the core of the hard-cider industry, which is rapidly growing in popularity, says Schumer. However, current federal tax rules make it extremely costly for Capital Region producers and consumers alike to produce, market and sell this product, which could prevent New York's hundreds of apple growers and hard cider producers from fully benefiting from the stable income that comes with this new product., Here's the problem, as Schumer sees it: Under federal law, hard apple and pear ciders cannot exceed 7 percent alcohol by volume or they become subject to the higher taxes of products with higher alcohol levels, like wine., But hitting the right level and no higher is tricky when working with a product like apples, which naturally vary in sweetness levels. Since the amount of sugar varies, that means the amount of alcohol produced will ultimately vary, too. Sometimes, those variations can put a particular cider batch's alcohol content above that 7 percent mark., And there are other factors that can alter how boozy a cider batch is., We don't know for sure how efficiently the available sugars will or will not be converted to ethanol, says Chris Gerling of the Cornell Extension Enology Lab. (It's about 51 percent, but not always.), Gerling has worked with wine and hard-cider producers in New York state for years on ways to boost production, teaching classes and offering advice. But recently, he's become the student, learning a bit of excise tax law, courtesy of the Alcohol and Tobacco Tax and Trade Bureau, as this issue has come up., The problem is that cider has to kind of drift between beer and wine in the regulations, and can cross major TTB definition [and/or] tax boundaries with relatively small changes [and/or] fermentation outcomes, Gerling says., And it gets even more complicated., Add too much carbonation to the hard cider, and it falls into the even higher tax realm of champagne., It's much more of a burden for cider producers than for somebody who's selling sparkling wine for $50 a bottle, he says., One reason regulations may be outdated is that hard apple cider, formerly the drink of choice for Colonial Americans, fell out of favor once beer got big. People just stopped making it here. It's only in recent years, as more U.S. producers have taken up making cider, that the tax issue has become a growing problem., The tax issue as it stands now creates all kind of messy labeling issues and potentially confusing price changes for cider makers, Schumer says, and can be an impediment to getting the stuff to market. That's especially true, he says, for the increasing number of small craft brewers and orchards with bushels of imperfect apples looking to turn more fruit into reliable profits, and those looking to plant new cider-specific varieties., The CIDER Act (yes, members of Congress love acronyms) would change the law to give cider makers up to 8.5 percent alcohol by volume to work with a range similar to what winemakers enjoy and bring U.S law in line with the European Union, where hard cider never lost its appeal., So what would it mean to the U.S. consumer? A few more sweet hard-cider choices.
After rising for years, the price of gold is now falling sharply. Lots of people are saying the gold bubble is over. It isn't., I have no idea whether the price of gold will rise or fall. But even if gold loses half its value tomorrow, the gold bubble won't be over., Defining a bubble can be surprisingly tricky, but here's a working definition: when the price of an asset rises to a point that can't rationally be justified by fundamentals. (In that sentence, asset basically means anything people buy and sell as an investment. Fundamentals basically means the stream of payments the investment generates.), In real estate, for example, you can compare the price of a house to how much you could get if you rented the house out. This ratio has been pretty steady over the long run. But during the housing bubble, the ratio of home prices to rents shot way, way up. During the bust, it fall back toward its historic norm., In the stock market, you can compare stock prices to corporate profits (also known as earnings). During the dot com bubble, the price-to-earnings ratio of the stock market rose sharply, then fell back to normal levels during the bust., Gold is different. Unlike real estate or stocks or other traditional investments, gold doesn't produce a stream of income no dividends, no interest payments, no rent. There are some industrial uses for gold. But, unlike other other commodities such as copper, gold's price isn't driven by its industrial uses., For a very long time, gold has been a safe haven in times of political and economic crisis. It is still widely seen as something to buy for the worst of times, and as a hedge against high inflation. To some extent, the recent fall in the price of gold may reflect a decline in fears of imminent crisis and inflation., But to say that the price of gold rose or fell is to speak in relative terms. It tells us nothing about what the price of gold should be based on the fundamentals., As the economist Tim Harford told us a few years back:, ... it's just not clear what the fundamental value of gold is. It's worth something because people have always thought it's worth something. And that's really weird, because what it tells you is gold is in a 4,000-year-old bubble. And if it's lasted 4,000 years, maybe it will last another 4,000 years. Who am I to say?
Drinks columnist David Wondrich is seen on Esquire's new Talk to Esquire app, which allows users to interact with several of the magazine's columnists through voice recognition., Drinks columnist David Wondrich is seen on Esquire's new Talk to Esquire app, which allows users to interact with several of the magazine's columnists through voice recognition., Imagine for a second what it would be like if you could talk to your radio, and your radio would actually listen. To get an idea of what this might be like, I downloaded an app called Talk to Esquire, from the magazine of the same name., When I opened it, the app asked me a question: What's your favorite type of liquor? That's a little forward, but it's Esquire so I played along and told the app that I'm more of a beer drinker., All that beer and no whiskey, I think you are making a mistake, replied Esquire's David Wondrich, the drinks columnist., Before I knew it, I found myself engrossed in a chat about booze. I was talking to recordings of Wondrich, and he, or really the app, was listening to what I said and answering me back., This went on for more than four minutes, and eventually my cyber David Wondrich showed me how to mix a mezcal old fashioned., OK Computer, Stanford professor Clifford Nass says this kind of synthetic conversation is possible because of advances in voice and language recognition. It's no longer just a party trick, though it still has limits., [The technology] definitely has gotten much better, Nass says. It's still not super accurate. Nowhere near the accuracy of even a 2-year-old child., Nass says an app like Esquire's can only work well when it tightly limits what the conversation we are having is about. Without context, such apps are lost., Still, many marketers see an opportunity. Some of the biggest technology companies in the country from Facebook and Google to Microsoft and Amazon are trying to figure how to best monetize mobile advertizing., Mobile banner ads just have not been super successful, says Mike McSherry, a vice president at Nuance, a company that specializes in voice-recognition technology., Voice is providing this window to the world of information, and it can be far faster than typing or navigating small screens, he says, which has been typically the challenge of small mobile devices to date., Digital forecasting company eMarketer estimates mobile ads could be a $37 billion business in the next few years. Nuance wants a big piece of that, and this month it released a mobile ad platform that will let advertisers create ads we can talk to., Nuance's Valentine's Dog House demo app uses voice technology., Nuance's Valentine's Dog House demo app uses voice technology., I played one of their demos, called Valentine's Dog House, for Clifford Nass., Who are you in trouble with? the app asks., My wife, Nass replies., And how mad is she?, Even though Nass was sitting at his desk with a lollipop in his mouth, and even mumbling a bit, the ad nailed it. He smiled to himself, chuckled and engaged with the ad., Nass says ads like these, when they work, have the potential to be incredibly powerful because they interact with us in a profoundly human way., The human brain is built for speech, so anything that sounds like a voice, our brains just light up and we get an enormous range of social and other responses, he says., Listen To The Sound Of My Voice, A voice even a synthetic one is packed with information our brains are programmed to decode, like gender or age. We simply can't help ourselves., When we talk to a computer and it answers back, Nass says most of us end up acting as if we're dealing with a real person. Social norms kick in seemingly automatically., Our brains are built to treat these conversations with computer-based voices to an incredible degree like [conversations] we are having with actual people including flattery, flirtation and all the rest, Nass says. We will see all of those same responses., Nass' own research found that people like computers better if those computers flatter them. He found that we're polite to the machines we talk to, and we identify with computerized voices that sound kind of like our own. We're even more likely to buy things from them., Advertisers are hoping they will be able to use all of this, but Nass warns there are big risks in these kinds of interactive ads as well., When they work well, they're fantastic; when they work poorly, they're really insulting and disturbing, he says., Nass says if a computer sounds like a person, but then interrupts you and acts like a jerk, real human beings are much more likely to hold a grudge.
Schematic of the current generation of six-speed transmissions co-developed by GM and Ford., Schematic of the current generation of six-speed transmissions co-developed by GM and Ford., Rivals Ford and General Motors said Monday they will work together to develop new transmissions aimed at helping them meet upcoming fuel efficiency standards., The new 9-speed transmissions for front-wheel-drive vehicles and 10 speeds for rear-drive and SUVs and trucks are expected to reach the market by 2016., Engineering teams from GM and Ford have already started initial design work on these new transmissions, said Jim Lanzon, GM vice president of global transmission engineering. We expect these new transmissions to raise the standard of technology, performance and quality for our customers while helping drive fuel economy improvements into both companies' future product portfolios., The New York Times says, GM is understood to have contributed the basic design of the new 9-speed for front-drive vehicles, while the 10-speed's design comes from Ford., The more gears in the transmission, the less hard the engine is required to work, which saves fuel. It also makes it possible to achieve both lively acceleration and quieter highway cruising without sacrificing either., By cooperating on design, engineering, and testing, the automakers are expected to save hundreds of millions of dollars and considerable development time, said Skip Nydam, an industry analyst with ND-Automotive and a former transmission engineer. It also saves the cost of licensing the design and production rights from a specialist transmission supplier like ZF of Germany or Aisin of Japan, which can cost up to $100 per unit, according to engineers at Ford and G.M., It is the third time in the past decade that the companies have cooperated on new transmissions. In 2002, they invested a combined $720 million to develop the current generation of 6-speed units. Several higher-end and luxury automobiles now have 8-speed transmissions.
The new Kool-Aid Man., The new Kool-Aid Man., Smashing through walls and yelling Oh, Yeah! apparently aren't cool enough for Kool-Aid Man anymore., Kraft Foods Group has decided that the pitcher pitchman needs an new look that plays up his undeniably fun personality., So he's now technologically advanced, CGI-generated and more interactive and colorful than ever. And, of course, he has a Facebook page., It seems that formerly rather terse Kool-Aid Man (a guy in a costume) will now be a bit of a chatterbox in his ad spots. In one, for example, he'll be seen thinking about which mix he should wear and saying that, I put my pants on one leg at a time. Except my pants are 22 different flavors. I've got grape pants, I've got watermelon pants., The good news for fans of the old guy: According to The Associated Press, Kraft isn't abandoning trademarks of its past campaigns in the new ads, which were developed by the ad agency Saatchi &amp; Saatchi. At the end of the commercial, the Kool-Aid Man heads out to work by calming busting through the front door. When he emerges, he waves cheerily to two awestruck kids riding their bikes past his front lawn., Still to come: How Family Guy will react to this news. As KpopStarz notes, on Family Guy every time a character says 'Oh Yeah,' a reasonable facsimile of Kool-Aid Man will come bursting through whatever wall may be near by., A 1976 Kool-Aid commercial.
Hi, it's another installment of Ask A Banker. We've gotten lots of good questions, and also lots of bad questions, on Twitter and email, but answered only a fraction of them, in part because in some columns I just answered questions that I or Planet Money made up. Sorry. So let's make up for lost time by giving short answers to a bunch of real questions from real people, or at least real email accounts. A lot of real people, it turns out, mostly want to know what it's like to work in banking., Tristan asks: How do you know if a job in finance is something you should be doing? Can you know before you go and try doing it?, Not only can't you know before you try it, you often can't know for the first few years of doing it. It's a weird industry in that junior investment bankers spend 100 hours a week making spreadsheets and formatting client presentations; the main skills required are attention to detail, cheerful obedience, and the ability to add two-digit numbers in your head. After a while, though, you graduate into a more senior role where you spend 70 hours a week flying to the Midwest to shake hands with a corporate treasurer and ask him how his kids are doing in school. The main skills required there are a firm handshake, a facility with small talk, and a good but not too good golf game., (Here is a more balanced and accurate account, but that's the gist of it. In non-investment-banking roles sales and trading, for instance this is not as true, but there is some truth to it even there.), The fact that successfully completing four to six years as a spreadsheet jockey is the prerequisite for becoming a traveling salesman has always struck me as a particularly acute case of the Peter Principle. Somehow it mostly works out. Often, though, it doesn't, and excellent junior bankers fail to transition to the more client-facing sales role. This can lead to disgruntlement, and since sales is generally rather a grubby profession the disgruntlement might be expressed in ways that can embarrass the banks., Still, there are a few things that might indicate you're cut out for a finance career. For one thing, it helps to like finance. Read the best book about mergers and acquisitions, Barbarians at the Gate, or the best book about sales and trading, Liar's Poker, and ask yourself: does that sound fun? I mean, it's mostly not as fun as those books make it out to be, but: it's never more fun., Otherwise: ideally you should be a little quantitative. Banking is not, as they say, rocket science, but those who are afraid to do a little mental arithmetic will run into trouble. You should be self-confident and like people: most successful senior bankers are essentially salesmen, and even those who aren't work in a culture that places a high priority on your ability to sell yourself., The other thing is ... well, take me. I used to sell derivatives and now I make stupid jokes about finance on the internet. And I write Ask A Banker columns about derivatives or whatever, and people say HOW CAN YOU BE SO CAVALIER? THOSE DERIVATIVES CAUSED THE FINANCIAL CRISIS AND THE MELTDOWN AND THE HOMEOWNERS AND CRIME. And I think Well, sort of, but isn't it interesting?, You should have that., Harold asks: How can bankers consistently work 100-hour weeks? How can someone keep this up for 10-20 years? How can they date, have families, and be normal, social, friendly individuals who can smalltalk about sports, movies, music, whatever? Why don't investment banks hire more people, pay them less, and have them work saner hours?, So there are three questions here. One is: how can bankers consistently work 100-hour weeks without, y'know, dying? Lots of junior investment bankers really are at work all the time. The way work flows work at banks, though, junior bankers spend much of their day more or less sitting around and listening in on conference calls, and really start pounding out the Excel models after their bosses dump a pile of work on them and leave for the night. It's not, like, 100 hours of manual labor, or even intellectual labor. It's 100 hours of being there., Another is: how can they be normal? One obvious answer to that is that they probably can't; many well-adjusted humans find investment bankers unpleasant to be around, or at least imagine that they do without much evidence. Another answer uses the horrible expression work hard play hard: you can work 100 hour weeks and have an active social life if you're willing to sacrifice sleep. Cocaine, obviously, helps, though its heyday in the financial industry is long past., Also, most trading floors have big TVs showing CNBC on mute; during big sporting events people change the channel and half-watch sports at work. So you can keep up on sports., Finally, there is: Why not hire more people and work them less? This is a great question, frequently asked by junior investment bankers themselves, generally late at night and in whiny tones. A partial answer is that investment banking is a client-service business, clients expect 24-hour availability on their most important work, and they want to be able to reach the person whom they know and trust rather than the random night-shift operator. Another part of the answer is that you wouldn't be entirely wrong to imagine investment banking as a little bit like a fraternity, and to think of the first two years of misery as macho camaraderie-building hazing passed on from one generation of junior bankers to the next., Incidentally I've used the word junior a lot here. The first two to five years at an investment bank are pretty rough. After that, you're not exactly working forty-hour weeks or anything, and you're travelling more, but your time is more manageable and more your own. You can have a family, for instance. I doubt there are a lot of 25-year-old investment bankers with kids, and if there are any I don't envy them., NR, who is really into us not using his or her name, asks: We always hear about the high flying 25-year-old investment banker. How can a young investment bankers, right out of university, earn six-figure salaries? Especially when they have so little on-the-job experience? I know doctors that didn't make that until long after their residencies. Who thinks a 25 year old is worth that much?, Banks do. That's who. Banks think 25-year-olds who execute deals that bring in eight figures of revenue are worth six figures of salary. To be fair, 25-year-old basketball players make even more. Also, like, apps or whatever. Are those people more important than doctors? Than bankers?, Banking is an industry that is built on the very strong belief that things are worth what people pay for them. There are plenty of careers that are not built on that belief: medicine, for one; most flavors of writing, for another. Some of them even pay well. Medicine, for one., A more concrete answer to your question goes like this: Some 25-year-old traders make millions of dollars for their banks, and so it seems only fair to pay them hundreds of thousands of dollars. Here's a 30-year-old hedge fund trader who made his employer $2 billion last year, which, like, what have you done that's so special? But most 25-year-olds at investment banks probably aren'tunique snowflakes who provide irreplaceable value to their banks that far outweighs whatever they get in salary. It's just that:, So they need to be paid well to stick around., Mark asks: I suppose you've got this question before, but why did you leave the industry?, To fulfill my childhood dream of being a blogger, obviously., Basically there are two reasons to work in investment banking:, Both are totally respectable, both are totally common. There is another approach, though, perhaps even more common though less respectable, which is basically #2 without the leaving to do something fun: you hate banking but stick around for the money, and the complaining. This is generally referred to as golden handcuffs, which implies sticking around for the money, though you shouldn't underestimate the psychological appeal of complaining a lot., I was kind of a mix of #1 and #2. I really liked many aspects of the business, just not enough of them to keep me there. I actually just like finance, and I liked a lot of the people I worked with and, God knows, the money. But as I've explained, the more senior you get in investment banking the more of a traveling salesman you become, and many aspects of the sales job - the constant travel, the schmoozing, the upselling - did not much appeal to me. And I had often thought of one day trying to make a go of writing for a living., And one day I had made enough money to allow me to take a risk and go do something else that I figured would be less lucrative but possibly more fun. And so I did.
Sprint now has two suitors: Japan's SoftBank and Colorado-based Dish Network., Sprint now has two suitors: Japan's SoftBank and Colorado-based Dish Network., Satellite TV distributor Dish Network has offered to buy telecom giant Sprint Nextel Corp. in a $25.5 billion deal, a move that could derail a similar offer by the Japanese phone company SoftBank., Dish says that it has offered $17.3 billion in cash and $8.2 billion in stock for Sprint. After the news was announced on Monday, Sprint's stock jumped 15 percent in pre-market trading, according to The Associated Press., Dish, of Englewood, Colo., says its offer is a 13 percent premium on the October SoftBank offer to buy 70 percent of Sprint for $20 billion, according to The Wall Street Journal. Dish also says its proposal would result in an estimated cost savings of $11 billion, the AP says., Sprint is in play, Dish Chairman Charles Ergen said in an interview with the WSJ in New York. We think we've made an offer that's much more compelling than the Softbank transaction., According to the WSJ:, The unsolicited offer is Mr. Ergen's most audacious attempt yet to move from the slow-growing pay-television business into the fast-evolving wireless industry. The satellite TV pioneer eased into the industry by amassing spectrum and winning approval from regulators last year to use it to offer land-based mobile-phone service. But he lacks much of the rest of the operation, including a cell phone network, which would be costly and time-consuming to build., Combining his company with Sprint would allow Dish to offer video, high-speed Internet and voice service across the country in one package whether people are at home or out and about, Mr. Ergen said. People who don't have access to broadband from a cable company would be able to sign up for Internet service delivered wirelessly from Sprint cellphone towers to an antenna installed on their roof, Mr. Ergen said.
An American Airlines 737-800 aircraft in January. The 737-800 is one of several variants the FAA has ordered to be inspected., An American Airlines 737-800 aircraft in January. The 737-800 is one of several variants the FAA has ordered to be inspected., Federal aviation officials have ordered that more than 1,000 Boeing 737s be examined to see if a key part on the plane's tail section needs to be replaced, The Wall Street Journal reported Monday., The Federal Aviation Administration issued the airworthiness directive for a pin that holds the 737's horizontal stabilizer to the rest of the tail, to see if it is in danger of failing prematurely. The horizontal stabilizer also known as the tail plane enables the pilot to control the aircraft's pitch., The FAA said the inspection was prompted by reports of an incorrect procedure used to apply the wear and corrosion protective surface coating to attach pins of the horizontal stabilizer rear spar., The agency says the directive affects 1,050 planes flown by U.S. carriers and could cost nearly $10,000 per aircraft., The WSJ reports that newer versions of the 737, which is the world's most widely used passenger aircraft, are most at risk for the defect. So far, the potentially defective part has not caused any accidents, the paper says., Airlines have until late May before the inspections begin, and have various compliance times based on the age of the aircraft and other factors, the newspaper says.
Credit: David Gilkey/NPR, The intersection of Crenshaw Boulevard and 28th Street looks like a lot of intersections in Los Angeles: There's a Taco Bell on one corner and a strip mall with a liquor store and a Liberty Tax Service office on the other. And out in front, as traffic speeds by, 27-year-old Robert Oliver is hard at work dancing., So, chest movements like this, this is called bucking, he says. His chest bounces to the beat. His Bluetooth headphones are on. And his feet glide across the hot sidewalk like he's on ice. I come up in here and I go down, and that's called a kill-off., He gracefully collapses into a pile of limbs, stacked on his feet, with his work outfit pooling around his crumpled legs., Oliver is dressed as the Statue of Liberty. Liberty Tax Service hires 24,000 part-time seasonal workers to drum up business, dancing and waving at cars., Robert Oliver, 27, has been dancing on the sidewalk outside of Liberty Income Tax for three years. He performs on the corner of 28th and Crenshaw in west Los Angeles., Robert Oliver, 27, has been dancing on the sidewalk outside of Liberty Income Tax for three years. He performs on the corner of 28th and Crenshaw in west Los Angeles., I'm never embarrassed to be out here, Oliver says. I'm proud of what I do. I can dance and not get pulled over by the cops and arrested. And I like dancing anyways. So if I'm not going to be doing it here, I'm going to be doing it somewhere else. But here I get to get paid for it, so it's great., It's part time and minimum wage (he makes $8 an hour). Oliver says he's happy with that for now. One perk of the job: free tax prep. But he doesn't take advantage of it. He has his own tax preparer: Mom., Oliver still lives at home with his mother, Vivian Oliver. I usually use TurboTax, she says., Sitting in the living room, they talk about his taxes and his work, and they open his W-2s for the first time. They don't add up to a lot. On one, his earnings totaled $398. On the other, he guesses he earned about $1,000., A thousand? No, not even close, says his mother. Honey, you only worked there a couple of days. $114., For the year, he's earned $512. That's not much, but he's optimistic., That's not good, you know, that's terrible, he says. But for me it's kind of like, where there's a will, there's a way, you know?, When he has work, Oliver works hard. He sold incense and oils at malls, gas stations and on Venice Beach unsteady work he really liked. He says he's tried to get a full-time job, but it's tough. He doesn't have computer skills, he doesn't have a driver's license, and he just got his GED last year., He worked on his GED longer than anyone alive, his mom says., On the ride back to work, Oliver opened up a little more about his life and why he and his mother are upbeat about his future., When Mom adopted us, I didn't even know how to read and write, he says., Oliver was 8 when he and his younger sister were adopted. Before he got to his mother's house, he says, he had cycled through five different foster homes. His mother put a stop to that. She nurtured him and gave him stability., The skills that I have learned since I've been with Mom I'm very thankful for that, he says., He has learned to read, learned to communicate better, has had years of therapy, and has become part of a vibrant church community. For Oliver, this job is an accomplishment. It's a world away from the life he saw for himself., I probably would've joined a gang, and I probably would've did things that I know I shouldn't have been doing, and I probably would have been in jail or dead, he says., He heads back into the office to get into his Statue of Liberty outfit, clamp on his headphones and hit the corner. This Tax Day is his last day here, until next January, if he still needs the job.
The New York Yankees' Craft Beer Destination met with derision online, after fans noted the beers were all MillerCoors products and one of them is a cider. The stand now has a new title, the Beer Mixology Destination., The New York Yankees' Craft Beer Destination met with derision online, after fans noted the beers were all MillerCoors products and one of them is a cider. The stand now has a new title, the Beer Mixology Destination., The baseball season is still young, but the New York Yankees have already faced harsh public criticism. No, we're not referring to their lackluster record. Instead, the Yanks were accused of trying to hoodwink beer drinkers with a new Craft Beer Destination concession stand at their Bronx stadium., The problem arose when writer Amanda Rykoff spotted the stand's sign, with an arty chalkboard effect imparting the sense of a brewpub. A fan might expect it to sell beers from New York's famed Brooklyn Brewery, or perhaps Brewery Ommegang, located in the baseball mecca of Cooperstown., Instead, all of the offerings Blue Moon; Leinenkugel's Summer Shandy; Crispin; Batch 19 exist under the MillerCoors corporate umbrella. None of them have a special tie to New York. As many critics noted, Crispin is a cider, not a beer. And its roots are in Minneapolis, home of the Yankee-hating Twins., Many news outlets including Deadspin took up the story, noting that as part of a conglomerate, the MillerCoors products don't meet the traditional definition of craft as established by the Brewers Association, which requires small production and independent ownership., We should note that in spotting the crafty ruse at Yankee Stadium, Rykoff didn't besmirch the beers., I confess that on a hot summer day, I will enjoy a Summer Shandy on occasion, and Blue Moon is certainly a popular beer, she wrote. But to call them 'craft beers' is nonsense and insulting. Real beer drinkers know better but countless numbers of fans will gladly shell out $12 for an overrated beer being marketed as a specialty brew., Rykoff concluded, Once again, the Yankees have figured out yet another way to charge a superior price for an inferior product., The team has now changed its approach, keeping the stand but renaming it the Beer Mixology Destination. That's the word from Amanda Rykoff, who announced what she called breaking beer news on Twitter Saturday., Other than seeming to be a brazen attempt to glom onto yet another trend and risking the wrath of cocktail enthusiasts the new name hints at the concoctions that result from combining Crispin cider with its three stand-mates., The Yankees are not alone in trying to tap into the growing craft beer market. Craft beer has made inroads at many Major League Baseball stadiums, as fans seek a brew with more flavor and perhaps a bit more kick, to cut down on trips to the concession stand (and other facilities)., In Detroit, at least seven Michigan craft brewers, including Bell's, Founders, and New Holland, have their beers on tap at Comerica Park, as Darren Rovell writes at ESPN., And in Baltimore, Orioles fans can easily find beers from Maryland and Delaware, Heavy Seas, Dogfish Head, and Evolution among them, as well as Flying Dog, which is tapping special cask-conditioned brews on Fridays. The Camden Yards property also has a brewpub that's open all year., And while San Diego fans have suffered through a 2-9 start this season, they can console themselves with a selection of craft beers that's among the best in the majors, befitting the city's bustling beer scene., The Petco Park Insider says the star lineup of brewers includes Stone, Green Flash, and Karl Strauss. The park also sells beer from Sierra Nevada, Ballast Point, and others., We should note that San Diego also has Bud Black at its stadium. But that's not an Anheuser-Busch product; it's the name of the Padres' manager.
A customer goes over tax documents at a post office in New York City on last year's Tax Day., A customer goes over tax documents at a post office in New York City on last year's Tax Day., Still haven't filed your taxes, eh?, Well, you have until 11:59 p.m. Monday to get it all done or at least file for an extension that gets you off the hook until Oct. 15. To help all of you procrastinators, here are answers to a few of your questions., If I'm filing by mail, can I come skidding into the post office at 11:58 p.m. and still make the deadline?, April 15, 2013, Maybe depending on where you live. Most post office locations will keep regular hours; some will stay open until 7 p.m. or 8 p.m. to make sure tax returns get postmarked before midnight. And a few very few will stay open until midnight to let the extreme procrastinators get a postmark stamped by 11:59 p.m., To find your local office's regular hours of operation, visit www.usps.com and select Find Locations. To find offices with extended hours, call 1-800-ASK-USPS (1-800-275-8777)., And the IRS says that to submit a valid filing, your envelope not only has to make the postmark deadline, but it also has to have the correct address and enough postage., These days, most people file electronically. What's the deadline for that?, The IRS says your tax return must be time stamped by an IRS-authorized electronic-return transmitter by 11:59 p.m. Fortunately, those transmitters take into account your time zone. So taxpayers in Boston have a midnight deadline and so do those in Seattle even though there is a three-hour difference between the two cities., I hate doing my taxes. Can I make it more fun by taking my laptop to a coffee shop? The flow of caffeine helps keep my mind sharp., Security experts say it's a bad idea to transmit important financial information using a public Wi-Fi connection. A public network makes it easier for bad actors to be listening in and intercepting your personal data., And don't file from your work computer either. You never know there could be an unscrupulous network administrator who is electronically looking over your shoulder to spot your Social Security number. It's best to do your taxes at home., And one more thing: Don't have a lot of browser tabs open when you are filling in your tax forms. You don't want to have spyware infecting one window while you are trying to file your information with the IRS in another., I give up. I really won't have time to get my taxes figured out by 11:59 p.m. Monday. What can I do?, It's easy to file for an extension to give yourself an extra six months. There's no harm in it roughly 140 million people file tax returns each year, and nearly 11 million will ask for an extension. No biggie., But here's the important thing to remember: Pushing back the filing deadline doesn't change the pay-your-taxes deadline. You owe your tax payment to the IRS by April 15, and if you don't pony up, you could face interest payments and penalties on what you owe., If you are like most people and have a tax refund coming to you, then it doesn't hurt to file for an extension. It only delays the arrival of your annual refund check. If you don't mind waiting, then neither does the IRS., Just fill out Form 4868 and mail it by Monday's deadline. Or file it electronically., If you owe money to the IRS, then do your best to estimate the amount and send it in. And if you just can't afford to pay your taxes now, you may qualify for a payment plan or other relief. The important thing is to file and let IRS officials know you are trying to deal with your situation, not hiding from the tax man.
As newspapers around the country struggle with declining subscription rates and smaller staffs, passionate, long-form digital storytelling is creating new ways of delivering richly detailed reporting., In the age of hundreds of cable channels, millions of 140-character bulletins and an untold number of cat videos, a fear has been growing among journalists and readers that long-form storytelling may be getting lost., People typically sort long-form journalism into two categories there's investigative or watchdog reporting, and then there's the kind we're talking about today: richly textured nonfiction narratives that delve deeply into the human experience and may have nothing to do with that day's headlines. Such stories are starting to crop up in new and sometimes surprising places., As a youngster, Jacqui Banaszynski always knew where to turn for a good read. Magazines, of course, have always been a home for that, she says. Especially the big-name magazines Esquire, Sports Illustrated a lot of the stuff I learned when I was younger and trying to figure this out was by reading Sports Illustrated, but I would be reading not about a sport, but the people in the sport. You know, Playboy did this stuff back in the day., Banaszynski became a newspaper reporter herself, a Pulitzer Prize winner at the St. Paul Pioneer Press and then an editor of prize-winning projects at the Seattle Times. She says in their heyday, the nation's great newspapers published such work routinely and not just The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal., The Philadelphia Inquirer in my mind was the gold standard; it was the one we looked to, Banaszynski says. The Miami Herald, The Detroit Free Press had some amazing writers., In recent years, however, such ambition has been harder to find. It's expensive to tie up reporters on intensive projects, and newspaper budgets are tight. Banaszynski is now a professor at the Missouri School of Journalism., When you have 30, 40, 50, 60 percent fewer reporters, and when the reporters you have left are so busy chasing info bits online, you're not going to have as much time for this kind of work, Banaszynski says., Even prestige magazines known for their lengthy pieces, such as The Atlantic and the New Yorker, are thinner than they used to be, and many articles are shorter than they once would have been. Yet readers are stumbling across some intense reads in unexpected spots., SB Nation is a site you visit for passionate postings and analyses of a lot of those info bits when it comes to professional and collegiate sports. It is a network of more than 300 fan-driven blogs. If you go to the home page of SB Nation, you probably won't see the words long form., A little over six months ago, [the site] did not really exist as a place for work of that quality, says SB Nation's Glenn Stout., Late last year, SB Nation hired Stout to commission and edit long-form pieces for the site. For more than two decades, he has been the series editor of the annual book The Best American Sportswriting. Now, SB Nation posts two to four such deep dives a week; often, they're multimedia efforts., They've included a look at how a pair of brothers from Seattle built an empire based on posters of sports stars, and another piece on the suicide of a former University of Maryland men's basketball player who made one of the most famous shots in the school's history., I want stories that, once I read them once, I want to read them a second time, Stout says. Readers are hungry for really good work, and more and more they are more and more likely to go looking for that work online for something they can read on their tablet or read on their phone., Jacqui Banaszynski, once a Pulitzer Prize-winning print reporter and editor at some of the country's most significant newspapers, says she is pleased by the growth of Web-based narrative journalism., Jacqui Banaszynski, once a Pulitzer Prize-winning print reporter and editor at some of the country's most significant newspapers, says she is pleased by the growth of Web-based narrative journalism., SB Nation is owned by Vox Media, which also created The Verge, a site covering digital culture, and Polygon, a gamer review and news site., We looked around the Web and we realized there was a race to the bottom, if you will, with a lot of content, says Jim Bankoff, the Vox CEO who hired Stout., Bankoff was an executive with AOL in the 1990s and helped advise Arianna Huffington as she was launching The Huffington Post. He says many online aggregators focus on lists and photo galleries to the exclusion of reported pieces., Part of why Web content became shorter and less substantive was that publishers believed in order to have a successful digital business model, they had to produce things as quickly and as cheaply as possible, Bankoff says., Bankoff decided to dart in the opposite direction at SB Nation., What we've found at Vox is that long-form stories are incredibly attractive to advertisers, Bankoff says. People are spending a lot of time with them. I think on average it's about 17 minutes in our case, and sometimes much longer than that., And such a glut and such a sea of stuff on the Web that is often not substantive, often is quick 'listicles' or even worse, we find that advertisers are flocking to quality and trying to get it where they can., Vox is by no means the only new-media publisher betting long. The viral website BuzzFeed, which posts adorable animal and baby pictures by the cartload, also published many lengthy pieces toward the end of last year's elections. One was a reflective article by the political reporter McKay Coppins about his experience as a Mormon covering the nation's first Mormon major-party presidential nominee., Older news organizations are finding new ways to tell stories, too. The New York Times received widespread accolades for the sophisticated marriage of narrative writing, video, photographs, maps and graphics it deployed to tell the story of an avalanche in Washington state in February., The Wall Street Journal has posted not just hours of daily video but lengthy video treatments effectively documentaries on complex issues such as corruption among elite Communist Party leaders in China., Reuters and Bloomberg News have beefed up their enterprise reporting and hired many experienced newspaper reporters. Some not-for-profit news sites have surfaced as well., None of this activity replaces the watchdog reporting that was lost at state capitals and city halls throughout the country because of the hollowing out of major metropolitan newspapers, though some not-for-profit news sites have surfaced to try to fill the gaps., Last month, the Pew Research Center issued a report that, if it were a Dickens novel, would have carried the title Bleak House for its depiction of depleted newsrooms filled with exhausted, demoralized reporters and editors., The report perceived few positive trends on either the journalistic or the revenue side of the equation, though it noted new income from metered pay walls that require repeat readers to pay for access to online content. But Slate's Matt Yglesias took issue with the underlying and largely despairing conclusions of a time of constricted ambitions., The American news media, he wrote, have never been in better shape. ... Almost everything you'd want to know about any subject is available at your fingertips. ..., Best of all, today's media ecology lets you add depth and context to the news, Yglesias said. He wrote that the report mistook the desires of journalists for the appetite of online readers., Yglesias' essay triggered a sharp response. The Atlantic's Conor Friedersdorf said Yglesias had missed the central component of American journalism: accountability., How well does it provide citizens the information they need to govern themselves? Friedersdorf wrote. How effectively does it fulfill its role as a watchdog? Judged accordingly, the verdict is a lot murkier., Banaszynski sees some hope, however, for the textured reporting and deep dives to which she has dedicated her career., When I go online, there's all of these little pockets of passion that have sprung up that are creating homes for it that never used to exist or at least were harder to find, Banaszynski says., SB Nation's Stout says he doesn't care whether his bosses' motivation is commercial or journalistic. All he cares about, Stout says, is their willingness to let him publish the kind of writing he thinks is worth reading.
American Airlines CEO Tom Horton stands next to a control tower at Berlin Brandenburg Airport in March 2012., American Airlines CEO Tom Horton stands next to a control tower at Berlin Brandenburg Airport in March 2012., A severance package of $20 million might have seemed reasonable to American Airlines CEO Tom Horton, but a U.S. bankruptcy judge says it's too much., The proposed payout, part of a deal that would merge American parent AMR and US Airways Group, first caught the attention of U.S. Trustee Tracy Hope Davis, a Department of Justice official monitoring AMR's Chapter 11 bankruptcy., According to Reuters, she objected to the amount of the payment relative to severance for non-management employees. On Thursday, U.S. Bankruptcy Judge Sean Lane said the payment also violates a 2005 federal code aimed at reining in excessive payments to executives of bankrupt firms, The Dallas Morning News reports., Horton, who became CEO 16 months ago just as AMR was filing for bankruptcy protection, first joined the company in 1985, but also spent several of the intervening years at AT&amp;T.;, His package, agreed to in February as part of the merger deal, would amount to $19.9 million divided equally between cash and stock. Under the agreement, Horton would step down as CEO of the new company and instead become non-executive chairman. Judge Lane had verbally approved the merger last month, but held off on a decision about Horton's severance., Lane on Thursday rejected an argument by AMR that the severance provisions of the federal bankruptcy code would not apply because the payout would happen only after the merger and therefore would technically be paid by the new merged entity and not bankrupt AMR., According to The Dallas Morning News:, AMR, its unsecured creditors committee and others have defended the proposed payment. They said it would not be paid until the merger became effective, and the merger wouldn't be effective until the airline was out of bankruptcy therefore, the bankruptcy code wouldn't apply., The judge disagreed. 'Of course, the debtors are correct in noting that the payment technically will not come from the debtors' estate. But that is somewhat of a legal fiction,' he wrote., 'It is clear that the severance payment relates to Mr. Horton's employment at AMR, where he currently serves as CEO, and not from Newco, which does not yet exist and where Mr. Horton will take on a new position only after the merger is finalized and the proposed severance is paid,' the judge said, with Newco being an assigned name for the merged American-US Airways., 'As a practical matter, moreover, the proposed severance would be paid without any action from Newco, an entity that will consist of 72 percent of the property of the reorganized debtors,' he added.
A steep drop in gasoline costs fueled a 0.6 percent decline in wholesale prices from February to March, the Bureau of Labor Statistics says., Excluding the volatile food and energy sectors, the so-called core rate of inflation was also in check: those prices rose a modest 0.2 percent., Friday morning's other economic indicator signals that consumers may have been more cautious about spending last month. The Census Bureau says retail sales fell 0.4 percent in March from February., That's the sharpest decline in nine months. Bloomberg News says the data may prompt economists, who are projecting consumer spending climbed in the first quarter at the fastest pace in two years, to reduce growth estimates. The drop did, though, follow a stronger month: Sales rose 1 percent in February., Consumers and their spending habits are closely watched because they purchase about 70 percent of the goods and services that companies produce.
Aereo CEO Chet Kanojia, Aereo CEO Chet Kanojia, A top executive at News Corp. dropped a bombshell this week when he said the company is considering taking Fox's over-the-air network to cable. The announcement follows a court win for a startup company that streams broadcast channels online., That startup's CEO, arguably the most feared man in television right now, is soft-spoken and rather techy., Chet Kanojia launched the service Aereo about a year ago. It's only in the New York City area right now. For a monthly fee, Aereo takes broadcast TV signals and streams them over the Internet. With a tap on an iPad, the local Fox station pops up on the screen., This is what has networks like Fox up in arms. For $8 a month, Aereo will provide a high-definition feed of the basic over-the-air channels: CBS, NBC, Fox and the like. If you're tech savvy, you can even watch it on your TV. Kanojia says he saw a demand for a cable alternative., Most people watch seven or eight channels, even though they have 500 channels, and a third of the households effectively just watched network television, he says., The problem, the stations say, is that they don't get a penny of Aereo's monthly fees., The fear is that if Aereo is allowed to continue, really, the new economic foundation of the broadcast business is threatened, says Robin Flynn, a senior analyst at SNL Kagan, which researches the media business., That new economic foundation is something called a retransmission fee. It used to be that cable companies didn't pay anything to deliver you the basic broadcast channels. That changed about five years ago. Flynn says as part of their cable bills, customers now pay about $1 a month for each station., That's turned into a big source of revenue for local affiliates, totaling $2.3 billion last year, on top of all the money stations get from advertising., The networks have really started to depend on the dual revenue stream to enable them to pay for programming, including sports programming and scripted dramas, Flynn says., Of course, if you had rabbit ears on your TV, you wouldn't pay anything for the stations, either. That's the loophole Aereo thinks it's found. Aereo actually assigns subscribers their own dime-sized antennas in its data center. Each one sends a signal over the Internet to just one user., So when the networks say Aereo should be paying them fees just like the cable companies do, Kanojia says his service is no different than having an antenna at home., We're not a cable company. We're an antenna technology, he says. Ever since broadcasting started, no antenna manufacturer, no television manufacturer has been required any kind of transmission fee., So far, an appeals court agrees with Kanojia. A consortium of networks tried to block Aereo, accusing the company of profiting off the copyrighted shows it spent millions to produce and air. But Aereo prevailed in the case., It was after that ruling that News Corp. President Chase Carey called Aereo a pirate and threatened to take Fox off the airwaves in retaliation. Soon, Univision said the same., Most think this is saber-rattling, but media lawyer Matthew DelNero says there's some precedent for the stations' argument. He was not involved in the Aereo case, though he does work with some of the networks that filed suit. He says, years ago, cable companies made similar arguments to the ones Aereo makes now., They said, 'We're simply delivering broadcast signals that someone could get just as easily over the air.' And Congress looked at that and said, 'Well, wait a minute, you're obviously delivering some value with that because subscribers are willing to pay you monthly fees for that,' DelNero says., It was then that over-the-air stations gained the right to charge for their channels., If Aereo continues to prevail in court, DelNero says cable companies could copy its model and free themselves from the fees. And after another court ruled against a similar service in California, all this may ultimately end up in the Supreme Court.
The tax code is full of complicated loopholes and deductions that require professional translation. So I called a bunch of accountants and tax lawyers and asked them: What are your favorite, most confusingly named deductions and what do they actually mean?, Intangible Drilling Costs, The government will pay you to dig a hole in the ground, says Howard Rosen, a CPA in St. Louis. You can write it all off immediately., This is for oil and gas companies, and for farmers who need to dig wells. But a question a lot of CPAs raised: What's intangible about a well? It's like if you think about drilling in your head, do you get a deduction? Greg Kyte, an accountant in Utah told me., (Note to last-minute filers: Just to be clear, you do not get a deduction for just thinking about digging a hole in the ground.), The Medical Deduction, Confusingly, this one is confusing because it sounds so simple. It sounds like you can deduct medical expenses. In fact, you can only deduct medical expenses that are more than 7.5 percent of your adjusted gross income., It should really be called the 'if only the you could get the medical deduction, medical deduction,' Shayna Chapman, a CPA in Ohio, told me. I mean, unless you're really sick or old, don't bother trying., 'Convenience Of The Employer' Exclusion, This is a part of the tax code that says if your employer provides basics like free food (common at many Silicon Valley startups) or a bed to sleep in (if you work on a ship), it's not considered compensation. So you don't have to pay taxes on it., There are lots of details in the tax code that talk about fringe benefits, and what does and doesn't count as part of your income. You don't have to pay taxes on the free coffee you get at the office because it's considered a de minimis fringe., It comes from the Latin phrase de minimis non curat lex, Mary Hevener, a D.C. tax attorney, told me. The Latin phrase translated literally is, 'The law does not concern itself with trifles.' But translated into real English, it's, 'Don't sweat the small stuff.'
Cows wait to be milked at a California dairy farm., Cows wait to be milked at a California dairy farm., For years, undercover videos documenting animal cruelty at farms and slaughterhouses have cast the nation's meat and dairy farmers in a grim light., In response, the livestock industry supported legislative efforts in multiple states designed to keep cameras from recording without permission in livestock plants. The Salt reported on these efforts, which activists call ag gag bills, last year., But recently, the livestock industry seems to have taken a sharp turn in its legislative tactics., Consider Assembly Bill 343 in California. Introduced in February, this bill would not prohibit a person from seeking employment at a slaughterhouse under false pretenses, which Iowa and several other states have outlawed. Nor would it forbid anyone from using a hidden camera while on the job, which Utah recently made illegal. All that AB 343 would do, in fact, is require that anyone who videotapes or records animal abuse turn over a copy of the evidence to police within 48 hours., It sounds like the type of bill that animal welfare groups would welcome but it isn't. Rather, these groups have branded AB 343 as simply a new, and subtler, attempt to stifle undercover investigations of animal cruelty., The 48-hour time limit is a new twist to stop people from compiling information, says Amanda Hitt of the Government Accountability Project, a Washington, D.C.-based group that helps investigate reports of animal abuses., According to Hitt, in order to prove that a serious animal abuse problem is occurring, undercover investigators must gather lengthy documentation. You can't prove that animal abuse is systemic and recurring through one snapshot or video of an abused cow, she says., For this reason, says Matt Rice of the group Mercy for Animals, the last thing we want to do is go to law enforcement at the first sign of animal abuses., But Justin Oldfield, of the California Cattlemen's Association AB 343's sponsor says the bill only intends to protect animals. Rather than allowing witnesses to keep quiet while they continue to film or photograph, Oldfield says, the bill mandates prompt reporting. He says that requirement will allow enforcement agencies to take swift action at the first indication of abused animals., But not everyone trusts that authorities will respond to such reports of abuse in the absence of uninterrupted undercover investigations lasting weeks or months., Taimie Bryant, a professor at UCLA School of Law who focuses on animal law, tells The Salt that public prosecutors tend to prioritize types of crimes other than those involving animal cruelty., In the past, videos shot by the Humane Society of the United States and turned over to federal prosecutors have resulted in quick action and the filing of charges, The New York Times recently reported., In the case mentioned by The Times, charges were filed before the undercover video was made public. But that's uncommon in animal-related cases, according to Bryant. She says legal action usually only occurs if there is media coverage, public outrage and pressure to prosecute., Public response [to livestock abuse videos] and clamor are what usually moves these types of cases up the ladder of priorities and motivates prosecutors to take action, she says., Even in court, judges are often easy on defendants if the evidence of animal abuse is thin, Bryant says., In 2009, Mercy for Animals publicly revealed seven weeks' worth of footage recorded at the Willet Dairy in Locke, N.Y. The videos show employees cutting off cows' horns and tails without using anesthesia. Bellowing calves are seen dragged by the legs away from their mothers. At least one worker was recorded digging his fingers into a struggling calf's eye socket. Eventually, an employee named Phil Niles was fined several hundred dollars on a misdemeanor animal cruelty conviction., The Cayuga County district attorney who handled the case, Jon Budelmann, tells The Salt that Niles' conviction was based largely on footage that showed Niles hitting a cow on the head with a wrench. Other events and images recorded at the Willet Dairy might also appear cruel to some outsiders, he says. But those events did not provide grounds for criminal prosecution, because they were considered normal within the industry, Budelmann explains., Occasionally, federal meat inspectors do speak up for animals but their superiors don't necessarily listen., Take the case of USDA veterinarian and slaughterhouse inspector Dean Wyatt. In 2010, Wyatt testified before a House subcommittee that, on several occasions, he was either overruled or threatened with demotion or transfer after he told superiors about instances of extreme animal abuse he'd witnessed., Wyatt said he'd seen employees butchering live animals at both Bushway Packing, a veal plant in Vermont, and at Seaboard Foods, a pig slaughterhouse in Oklahoma., He went up the chain of command reporting violations [at the Bushway veal slaughterhouse in Vermont], and they did nothing until the Humane Society [of the United States'] video came out, says Hitt with the Government Accountability Project., California's AB 343 is scheduled to be heard by the state Assembly on April 17. Tennessee, Vermont and Nebraska are also now considering legislation that includes clauses with time limits on turning over recordings of animal abuse., If these bills become law, they could eliminate the only source of oversight available at dairies and feedlots, warns Bryant at UCLA. She says that federal inspectors assigned to oversee animal welfare only work at slaughterhouses., But for dairies and feedlots, she says, these undercover videos are all we have.
How a Family Root Beer Stand Grew Into a Global Hotel Company, by J. W., Jr. Marriott and Kathi Ann Brown, Hardcover, 191 pages | purchase, More on this book:, In the 1920s, a man passing through Washington, D.C., noticed something about the city in September: It was sweltering, and there were few places to seek relief. He figured you could make a lot of money selling ice-cold drinks., That first business venture set J.W. Bill Marriott Jr. on a road to riches., The story of how it all happened is the subject of Marriott's latest book, Without Reservations: How a Family Root Beer Stand Grew Into a Global Hotel Company. The chairman of Marriott International sat down with NPR's Michel Martin to share how his family's drink stand became a chain of Hot Shoppes restaurants and eventually a Marriott hotel., Marriott remembers his father building the family's first hotel just outside of Washington at the 14th Street bridge, between what's now Reagan National Airport and the Pentagon. But it wasn't an easy start. The elder Marriott knew little about running a hotel. His son was eager for a new opportunity, though., So I said, 'Nobody's running this hotel, why don't you let me have a crack at it?' He said, 'You don't know anything about the hotel business.' And I said, 'Well neither does anybody else around here.' , Since then, Marriott International has expanded from places like Dubuque, Iowa, to Dubai and the United Arab Emirates. Marriott attributes a lot of his company's success to listening closely to all the employees., I think it's probably the most important thing a successful executive can do is to listen and learn, he says., It's something Marriott learned as a young man. He was home on leave from the Navy, shortly after graduating from college. Family friends, who happened to be President Eisenhower and the first lady, were visiting his family's farm and trying to decide whether to venture out hunting on a cold day., I was standing off in the corner, hiding, and the president looked at me and said, 'What do you want to do, Bill? What do you think we should do?' And I've never forgotten that., No wonder he could deal with Montgomery and Patton and all those people he dealt with in the second world war, he adds, because he made them feel important. He showed respect for them. He showed interest in what their beliefs were, and he asked that very important question: 'What do you think?' , Marriott is a leader in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. He contributed to former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney's presidential campaign, and Romney serves on Marriott's board., Yet Marriott says he believes strongly in separating his personal beliefs from the ethos of his company. He says that his church has taught him you can be in the world, but not of the world, meaning that personal beliefs and a company's values don't necessarily have to be in sync., We were one of the very first [companies] to come out with [domestic] partner benefits, he says. He tells Michel Martin the decision was a no-brainer. Some of our most leading, talented people are in this community. So we recognize if we're going to have a successful company, we've got to have talent, and we draw talent from all over the place., Marriott hopes advice in his book will be useful to those who are curious about the company's keys to success. I've tried ... to explain why we've been successful, and how we've been successful. And it all comes back to listening and learning.
Visitors tried out Windows 8 last month at the 2013 CeBIT technology trade fair in Hanover, Germany., Visitors tried out Windows 8 last month at the 2013 CeBIT technology trade fair in Hanover, Germany., Sales of new PCs plummeted nearly 14 percent globally in the first three months of the year, and much of the blame is being placed on Microsoft's new Windows 8 operating system., International Data Corp. reported Wednesday that shipments of PCs totaled 76.3 million worldwide in the first quarter of 2013, down 13.9 percent from the same period the previous year., PC shipments were down significantly across all regions compared to a year ago, IDC said, blaming fading mini notebook shipments and competition from tablets and smartphones ... as well as a weak reception for Windows 8., As The New York Times reports, consumers right now are more jazzed by mobile technologies than by old-school conventional computers:, In this environment, Microsoft introduced Windows 8 last October. The software, a bold redesign of the company's flagship operating system, is tailored to run on tablets, traditional keyboard-and-mouse computers and hybrid devices that combine elements of both. But it seems that the changes Microsoft made with Windows were so extreme that they scared off buyers., The Wall Street Journal quotes IDC analyst Jay Chou as saying the reaction to Windows 8 is real and that businesses also are keeping their distance., Ricoh Americas COO Tracey Rothenberger told the Journal that the company will stick with Windows 7, released in 2009, instead of switching to Windows 8 on its 17,000 PCs., I don't think there's anything wrong with [Windows 8], Rothenberger said. But I think there's minimal value in the incremental changes that are there., The plunge in sales has sparked a decline in shares of some computer makers, with Hewlett-Packard, Apple and Dell all losing ground in Thursday morning trading.
The Federal Reserve's headquarters in Washington, D.C. What goes on inside there is of intense interest to investors., The Federal Reserve's headquarters in Washington, D.C. What goes on inside there is of intense interest to investors., There's been a bit of a brouhaha over the Federal Reserve's inadvertent early release Tuesday evening of minutes from its closed-door March 19-20 policy meeting., As The Associated Press writes, employees at JPMorgan Chase, Goldman Sachs Group, Wells Fargo and Citigroup were among those to receive [the] market-sensitive information., The Fed says a staffer mistakenly sent the report to a group, also including some trade associations and lawmakers, that should have gotten the information right after it was made public not before. The Fed's inspector general is going to investigate what happened., There haven't been any reports to indicate that anyone who got the news a day early traded on the information (which was supposed to be released at 2 p.m. ET on Wednesday; after discovering the mistake, the Fed put it out to the rest of the world at 9 a.m. ET that morning)., But once the minutes were there for everyone to see, they did move financial markets. As The New York Times writes, stock markets rallied. Traders focused on signs that Fed policymakers are committed to battling a weak economy and soft labor market, CNBC says., All this fuss about minutes of a meeting held three weeks ago raises a question: Why do they matter so much to so many investors and financial institutions?, It's because the markets are always looking for tiny morsels of information about what these guys are thinking, says Michael Englund, chief economist at Action Economics, a bond and currency consulting service that provides its clients with economic analysis., The minutes offer a chance to see how Fed policymakers are balancing their different views, Englund tells us. And any subtle changes can change perceptions in the markets., Other than occasional speeches given by Fed policymakers as well as Chairman Ben Bernanke's twice-annual testimony before Congress and his handful of news conferences each year, Fed watchers don't get much information about what the central bank's chiefs are thinking. So the meetings' minutes get parsed carefully. The policymakers gather eight times a year., And, Englund says, this was a bad one to leak because it did [end up] moving the market. Traders concluded, he says, that perhaps there was more energy expressed by Fed policymakers for gradually reducing the amount of stimulus they're giving the economy meaning that those policymakers thought the economy is on the upswing., Of course, with economics there's always an on the other hand. In this case, since the Fed policymakers met in mid-March there's been disappointing news on job growth. That could mean the economy isn't doing as well as those Fed officials thought, which in turn could mean that they won't move to ease up on their stimulus efforts., We won't know what Bernanke and his colleagues think, though, until the third week of May when the Fed releases (presumably on time) the minutes of their April 30-May 1 policy meeting.
Many Americans hope to see more signs like this in coming months. (Photo taken earlier this year in San Rafael, Calif.), Many Americans hope to see more signs like this in coming months. (Photo taken earlier this year in San Rafael, Calif.), There were 346,000 first-time claims for unemployment benefits, down 42,000 from the week before, the Employment and Training Administration reports., Meanwhile, the 4-week moving average of claims was 358,000, up by 3,000 from the previous week's 355,000. That measure smooths out some of the volatility in the numbers., After recent reports that were disappointing including last week's news that employers added only 88,000 jobs to their payrolls in March Thursday's data on jobless claims were a positive switch., Bloomberg News says the decline in claims was more than forecast and could be a sign that some things that tend to cause unusual swings in data, including holidays such as Easter, have worked their way through the numbers., The spike in claims was temporary, Brian Jones, a senior U.S. economist at Societe Generale in New York, tells Bloomberg. Claims will continue to come down. Things are getting better.
If you have a CD or book you don't want anymore, you can sell it. The law says that's perfectly legal. But what about an MP3 or an e-book? Can you legally resell your digital goods?, This was the question before a judge in the case of Capitol Records v. ReDigi Inc., Launched in 2011, ReDigi is basically a digital version of a used-record store. You can sell the company your old MP3s, and you can buy used MP3s that other people have sold., ReDigi says its technology ensures that the person selling a used MP3 can only sell it once and can't keep listening it after it's been sold., But, not surprisingly, record labels don't like the idea of people buying and selling used MP3s. A month after ReDigi launched, it got a cease and desist letter from the Recording Industry Association of America that said there can be no doubt that ReDigi's conduct constitutes willful copyright infringement., Last year, Capitol Records sued ReDigi. Their complaint alleged that ReDigi makes and assists its users in making systematic, repeated and unauthorized reproductions and distributions of Plaintiffs copyrighted sound recordings., The case revolved around a legal concept known as the first sale doctrine, which basically says that once you buy a copyrighted work like an album it's yours to do with as you wish., You can sell it to someone else; you can give it away, lend it, use it as a doorstop, use it as a Frisbee, Bill Rosenblatt of GiantSteps Media Technology Strategies told me., The founder and CEO of ReDigi, John Ossemacher, says if this law applies to physical albums, it should also apply to digital albums., We see it very, very clearly that a copyright good is a copyright good and buyers of those copyright goods are entitled to certain protections under the law, says Ossenmacher. Those apply to digital just as much as they apply to any format., The transcripts of the court case show just how complicated this issue can get. It veers from discussions of law and legal precedent to these pretty existential questions., Do you really own something if it's just a bunch of ones and zeroes on your computer? If you take a digital song and you move someplace else, did you actually move it or did you just make a copy and destroy the original?, And, like so many discussions that touch on the nature of existence, the discussion in the courtroom led to Star Trek:, THE COURT: I kept thinking about this, but I'm not a Trekkie, but I kept thinking it's the difference from Captain Kirk going from the Enterprise to the planet through that transporter thing, where he's not duplicated, to the cloning where there's a good and a bad Captain Kirk where they're both running around. I think one is a copy and the other is the other was transported and it's only one Captain Kirk., MR. MANDEL: Right. And, you know, that's part of the problem we have at a basic level because it's not Star Trek here, and I don't think they're really saying &mdash;, THE COURT: Wouldn't it be cool if it were?, Also, Willy Wonka:, MR. ADELMAN: I mean, one of the examples I was thinking of was Willy Wonka. Remember when they put Tommy on the stage. They beamed him, and you saw the particles go across the top and, boom, there he was, miniaturized, but still him in that TV. What's so hard to believe?, Despite all the references to the future and new technology, it was a word from the 1970s that was really at the heart of this case: phonorecord., First sale doctrine states that the owner of a particular copy or phonorecord lawfully made is entitled to sell or otherwise dispose of the possession of that copy or phonorecord., The lawyers for Capitol argued that ReDigi couldn't be protected by first sale because the process of selling digital music through the company's platform created a copy of the music file, a new phonorecord., In the end, the judge sided with Capitol. He wrote:, ...the fact that a file has moved from one material object the user's computer to another the ReDigi server means that a reproduction has occurred. Similarly, when a ReDigi user downloads a new purchase from the ReDigi website to her computer, yet another reproduction is created. It is beside the point that the original phonorecord no longer exists. It matters only that a new phonorecord has been created., So does that mean you can't sell your MP3s? No. It just means that you can't sell them on ReDigi., The judge said that the first sale doctrine does apply to digital works, but it only protects the sale of that 'particular' phonorecord, be it a computer hard disk, iPod, or other memory device onto which the file was originally downloaded., In other words, the judge said you can sell your old MP3s as long as you sell them along with whatever device you used to download the MP3s in the first place., Capitol Records declined to comment for this story., Jason Schultz, a law professor at the University of California, Berkeley, who used to work for the Electronic Frontier Foundation, said that the ruling may kill off the used-book and record stores of the digital age. There is a lot of value both economic and social that we get from having secondary markets, he told me., The people at ReDigi say they'll appeal the ruling. They also say they've created new technology, ReDigi 2.0, to comply with the ruling. With the new technology, ReDigi customers who buy new MP3's will have the MP3s sent directly to ReDigi's servers in the cloud.
&ldquo; There's no way you can compete. When someone is paying less per hour, no workman's comp, no payroll taxes, [no] unemployment we can't overcome that. , - Stan Marek, CEO, Marek Family of Companies, This story is part of a two-part series about the construction industry in Texas. Find the first part here., Homes in Texas are cheap at least compared with much of the country. You can buy a brand new, five-bedroom, 3,000-square-foot house near Fort Worth for just $160,000., But that affordability comes at a price to workers, many of whom are in the country illegally and make $12 an hour or less, but also to business owners., Let's say you own a big Texas construction firm, and you want to run your business the right way. You try your darndest to hire only legal workers and pay them a decent salary plus benefits., Most importantly you pay all your taxes, Social Security, unemployment everything you're supposed to just like a normal company in other industries., So, how's that working out?, There's no way you can compete, says Stan Marek, CEO of the Marek Family of Companies, one of the largest commercial interior contractors in Texas. They've been in business 75 years, but Marek says the past four have been extremely difficult., When someone is paying less per hour, no workman's comp, no payroll taxes, [no] unemployment we can't overcome that, he says., Contractors, Subcontractors And Independent Contractors, At Baylor College of Medicine in Houston, Marek's workers are building the interior for the hospital's newest wing. Workers ride around on what are called motorized man lifts, which allow them to work high in the air, power tools in hand., Baylor Hospital is the kind of client that hires Marek's companies an owner that must have its building done to exacting specifications. But these days, Marek says, that's unusual. The main thing most clients care about, he says, is how cheaply the job can be done., That's where the subcontractors and independent contractors come in., It's very common in our industry for hourly guys to do the framing, which is putting up the middle studs, and then hiring a sub-crew to come in and do the Sheetrock, and then hiring a different sub-crew to come in and do the taping and floating, Marek explains. And a different sub-crew to come in and do the grid for the ceiling. And a different crew to put in the tile. That's very common., And that's how an estimated half-million undocumented, mostly Hispanic construction workers go to work each day in Texas. Marek says in the 1940s, '50s, '60s and '70s, his uncle, John Marek, who started the company, paid union wages, and his workers lived stable, middle-class lives., &ldquo; If I were to speculate, I would probably say they are not paying their Social Security [taxes]. I would also say that they're probably not filing their income tax returns on a regular basis., - Trent, a landscape contractor, on his workers, But according to a new study from the University of Texas and the Austin-based Workers Defense Project, today's construction workers in Texas make near-poverty wages an average $12 an hour., Marek says Texas high school kids no longer dream of a good life working in construction. You're not gonna get kids to go to work in construction without a career path and a better wage, he says., Marek is a Texas Aggie conservative Republican, but he says his industry and the country need immigration reform that will turn all the undocumented workers into documented workers. That would level the playing field for companies like his that want to abide by the law, he says, and will lead to better wages and a career path for American kids who aren't cut out for college., Undocumented Laborers, Working For Cash, There are certainly no Texas high school graduates building a retaining wall in Dallas' upscale Highland Park neighborhood on a recent day. Well, unless you count Trent, the owner of a landscape construction company. Trent, who asked that NPR not use his last name because the IRS might take an interest in his business, designs and builds landscapes in the Dallas-Fort Worth area., I don't pay anyone by the hour. In fact, I treat the guys that work on my crew as subcontractors they are self-employed, he says., This is a key distinction. If Trent were to classify his workers as employees, he'd have to pay taxes, Social Security, unemployment and overtime. But by saying his workers are actually independent contractors in essence, business owners he's off the hook., Trent says his workers have been working with him for years. He has between four and seven laborers per day on most projects. And he knows most of them don't have papers. I would say 10 percent are documented, he says., Trent pays his workers a fixed amount per project, in cash. If the job takes a little longer than expected, nobody asks for more money. On average, each worker makes $70 a day, more if they're skilled., &ldquo; If there wasn't such a readily available supply of laborers that are looking for work in my exact line of business, then I would say I am doing wrong and that I should play by the rules. I don't feel as though I'm doing anything wrong., - Trent, landscape contractor, Trent says he doesn't know if any of his guys are paying taxes. That's their business, he says. If I were to speculate, I would probably say they are not paying their Social Security [taxes]. I would also say that they're probably not filing their income tax returns on a regular basis., An Underground Economy, The University of Texas and Workers Defense Project study estimates that $7 billion in wages go unreported from nearly 400,000 illegally classified Texas construction workers each year. It's evolved into a massive underground economy, the report says, that cheats the state and federal government of billions of dollars in taxes and revenue each year., Trent says he'd be happy to classify his workers as employees and pay the government all it's owed as long as his competition does the same. But the reality is that Trent often finds he's underbid on landscape projects, even though he's paying his undocumented workers $70 a day., The fact of the matter is that the people that I'm competing against have the same large pool of undocumented workers to use on their crews, he says., Trent says blaming him for the nation's immigration problem is like blaming an Army corporal because a war was lost. He says he didn't make this competitive playing field or the Texas or Mexican economies. He's one 40-year-old man in landscape construction, he says, doing the best he can., If there wasn't such a readily available supply of laborers that are looking for work in my exact line of business, then I would say I am doing wrong and that I should play by the rules, Trent says. I don't feel as though I'm doing anything wrong., Trent says this is now the way the construction business is done in Texas, and that nobody seriously worries about enforcement. There aren't enough IRS agents in the world to make a dent.
Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration, Census Bureau, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, Until well into the 19th century, if you lived in the U.S. and wanted to heat your house, fire your forge, or whatever, you did what people had done for thousands of years: You chopped down a tree and burned it., It wasn't until the rise of the railroads in the mid 19th-century that coal became a significant energy source in this country. As industrialization continued in the second half of the century, the use of coal continued to rise, powering heavy industry (think U.S. Steel), heating urban homes, and generating electric power., The 20th century (the first three quarters of it, anyway) was the age of the internal combustion engine and, by extension, the age of oil. We still get more energy from oil than from any other source, and most of that oil winds up in cars and trucks and, to a lesser extent, planes and trains., Natural gas came in in a big way after World War II, heating homes and generating electricity. (There also were, and are, a bunch of industrial uses for natural gas.), The energy shock of the 1970s, which drove up the price of both oil and natural gas, ended the 200-year-long rise in per capita energy use not just during the shock, but for decades after, as energy efficiency continued to improve. , Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration, Census Bureau, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, Population growth meant that total energy use kept increasing, though., Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, The spike in oil prices in the first decade of the 21st century, combined with a massive recession, drove down per capita oil use even more. In the past few years, as natural gas got a lot cheaper, power companies started using more gas and less coal a trend that is expected to continue., And that's basically the history of energy use in America except for those other little lines down at the bottom of the chart., Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, One of those lines is nuclear power. Perhaps the most striking thing about nuclear power is that, despite the fact that it's been decades since a new power plant was commissioned in this country, nuclear power has persisted. In fact, it's increased a bit, as output from existing plants has increased., Also down at the bottom are hydroelectric power (dams that generate electricity) and other renewables (solar, wind, etc.). Though renewables have risen sharply in the past few years, they still represent a tiny fraction of the energy used in this country., In putting together this post, we spoke with energy experts James Hamilton of UCSD and Vaclav Smil of the University of Manitoba. Also, see this world energy timeline from Daniel Yergin., Notes on the data: Energy data are in 10-year intervals between 1775 and 1845, in five year intervals between 1845 and 1949, and annually since then. Census data for the U.S. Population are in 10-year intervals between 1790 and 1900 and annually since then.
A rare example of the 1909 Honus Wagner baseball card. In 2007, one of them fetched a whopping $2.8 million., A rare example of the 1909 Honus Wagner baseball card. In 2007, one of them fetched a whopping $2.8 million., A judge has rejected a plea agreement from the former head of a sports memorabilia auction house who admitted to using shill bidders to drive up prices and to altering the most valuable baseball card ever sold., William Mastro of Mastro Auctions admitted to doctoring the 1909 Honus Wagner cigarette card that was once owned by hockey great Wayne Gretzky. The card sold for $2.8 million in 2007., According to The Chicago Sun-Times:, Mastro had denied doctoring the card to fraudulently improve its appearance and value, but according to a government court filing last week, he has now 'candidly' spoken to investigators about how he 'cut the sides of the ... Honus Wagner card despite prior statements to the contrary.' , Wagner, who played shortstop for the Pittsburgh Pirates, is considered perhaps the best ever to play the position. In 1909, the American Tobacco Co. issued his likeness as part of a much larger set of baseball cards sold with packs of cigarettes. But Wagner, who didn't want kids to buy cigarettes to get the card, insisted it be withdrawn. Only about 200 were ever issued, and only 57 are known to exist today, according to ESPN., Mastro, charged with mail fraud, agreed to plead guilty in exchange for a prison term of no more than 30 months, says Bloomberg, quoting an April 2 court filing. If convicted at trial, Mastro faces a possible 20-year sentence., The Sun-Times says Mastro, 60, also allegedly sold a phony lock of Elvis Presley's hair and a fake 1869 Cincinnati Reds Stockings trophy.
Organic apples hang from trees in an orchard in Forest Range, Adelaide Hills, South Australia., Organic apples hang from trees in an orchard in Forest Range, Adelaide Hills, South Australia., Note: We've updated the headline on this post for the sake of clarity. To be clear, it's the apple and pear tree blossoms that get sprayed with antibiotics, not the fruit itself., Apples and especially pears are vulnerable to a nasty bacterial infection called fire blight that, left unchecked, can spread quickly, killing fruit trees and sometimes devastating whole orchards., It's basically like a gangrene of your limbs. It's hard to stop once it takes hold, says Ken Johnson, a plant pathologist at Oregon State University., It's such a big threat that for decades, growers have seen two antibiotics, streptomycin and oxytetracycline, as vital weapons in the fight to control the disease even on organic apples and pears., But their use has raised questions about transparency in organic labeling, amid concerns about the overuse of antibiotics in food production., This isn't what consumers expect out of organics, says Urvashi Rangan, the director of consumer safety and sustainability at Consumer Reports. Organic is supposed to be consistent in meaning, she tells The Salt., Here's the back story., When the U.S. Department of Agriculture's national organic labeling standards went into effect in 2002, the two antibiotics were listed as synthetic materials approved for use in organic apple and pear production. Items on that list are revisited on a periodic basis. The notion behind the exemption for these two fruit crops was that, in between reviews, growers would devise effective non-antibiotic-based methods for controlling fire blight., But the antibiotic exemption is set to expire in October 2014. This week, the National Organic Standards Board is meeting in Portland, Ore., to decide on a petition from organic growers to extend that exemption. Consumers Union, the policy arm of Consumer Reports, is among the groups who say the answer should be a resounding no., Antibiotics have been used in American plant and livestock agriculture since the mid-20th century. About 80 percent of all antibiotics used in the U.S. go to livestock not just to treat disease and prevent infections, but also, primarily, to help animals put on more weight., That heavy usage has been widely blamed for promoting the spread of antibiotic-resistant bugs. And resistance can jump from bacteria that infect livestock to microbes that sicken people. The problem of drug resistance has led to widespread calls for reining in the use of antibiotics on farms, in order to preserve the medicines' effectiveness in treating human disease., But antibiotic use in plant agriculture is far more limited just a little over one-tenth of 1 percent of total agricultural use, according to Virginia Stockwell, a plant pathologist at Oregon State University who studies fire blight management. Put another way, about 30 million pounds of antibiotics were used in livestock in 2011. By comparison, 36,000 pounds of antibiotics were sprayed on fruit trees mostly on pears and apples, according to data she compiled from the USDA's National Agricultural Statistics Service., In the U.S., up to 16 percent of all apple acreage and up to 40 percent of all pear acreage get sprayed with antibiotics each year, she says, citing data from NASS. That's including all organic and conventionally grown fruit. Not every orchard gets sprayed every year., There have never been any cases where we've been able to link an antibiotic-resistant pathogen in humans to orchards, says Stockwell, who recently conducted a review of the literature on the subject for the National Organic Standards Board., Fire blight symptoms on pear leaves. Pears are particularly susceptible to the disease., Fire blight symptoms on pear leaves. Pears are particularly susceptible to the disease., Research suggests both of the antibiotics used on fruit crops are rendered inactive in soils, she says, minimizing concerns that residues that drift to the ground after spraying would be a problem. Any residue on fruit, she says, is minuscule., That said, fire blight resistance to streptomycin is a concern for growers it's now pretty common in orchards in the Pacific Northwest. That's one reason why growers have scaled back their spraying over the past two decades, Stockwell says., Everybody is committed to eliminating this use, says David Granatstein, a sustainable agricultural specialist with Washington State University, who works with organic farmers in his state., But before all organic growers can completely give up antibiotics, he says, they need to have effective alternatives for preventing the devastation of fire blight., Aggressive pruning has helped reduce reliance on antibiotic spraying. So has the use of biological controls, like bacteria that compete with E. amylovora, the microbe that causes fire blight, for nutrients on blossoms. But it's not enough., Oregon State's Ken Johnson is one of several researchers overseeing field trials of two promising antibiotic alternatives. I'd say we're fairly close, Johnson tells The Salt., He's set to testify about these alternatives before the National Organic Standards Board on Wednesday. One option, called Blossom Protect, is a yeast-like fungus that blocks the fire blight bacteria from colonizing the blossom. It was registered for use with the Environmental Protection Agency late into last year's growing season, so this will be the first year lots of farmers can try it., The other alternative, a copper sulfate that can be applied during bloom times without harming the fruit, has yet to be registered with the agency. Both are highly promising, according to Johnson but they need more testing. So 2014, he says, is still a bit too soon to say goodbye to antibiotics., Most people, he says, when their livelihoods depend on it, want to see a few years of positive data before they're convinced that it is the right thing for them.
A Denver man runs in the snow near Washington Park after a winter storm moved through town in late January., A Denver man runs in the snow near Washington Park after a winter storm moved through town in late January., It may cost less to do business in places where there's what some people call a culture of health. And that's put Colorado, which has the lowest rates of adult obesity in the country, on the map for companies looking to relocate or expand., Kelly Brough is making the most of it. She runs the Denver Metro Chamber of Commerce, and she's creative about luring businesses to relocate to Colorado. She runs a Colorado loves California campaign, for instance., We do it on Valentine's Day, she says. The CEOs actually do get valentines from us. And it's been a real creative, cool way to say to companies, 'We know you're out there, and we think you may be interested.' , Brough says if Colorado can catch executives' attention, she's got the numbers to hook them. And she's talking about more than just the typical tax breaks and labor costs., Our obesity rate being the lowest in the nation ranked extremely high for the companies we recently attracted, she said at a luncheon for Denver health leaders., When Brough meets with businesses, she touts Colorado's low rates of common chronic diseases diabetes, heart disease and cancer among the ones that cost companies a lot of money in health insurance claims., April 10, 2013, A healthy workforce is one big reason DaVita, a Fortune 500 company that provides dialysis services, moved its corporate headquarters to Denver from Los Angeles. Colorado also offered the company tax breaks., We were confident that Colorado and Denver had a better chance at creating a differentially healthy city over the next 30 to 40 years, than a number of other locations, says DaVita CEO Kent Thiry., Thiry chalks that up in part to a culture in Colorado that has long valued health, fitness and quality of life. He says it's helped him recruit the executives his company needs at its headquarters in Denver, and the young, college-educated professionals he wants to hire., A healthier team actually does better work, and leads a happier life. So that both the company and the individuals are better off if it's a healthier environment, he says., Thiry talks about health in terms of his employees' quality of life, but the bottom line is paramount. He expects DaVita to save money by having fewer employees on sick leave and by having lower health costs., Labor market analyst Robert Marsh works for the commercial real estate giant CBRE and helps companies find pools of workers the same way brokers help them find real estate. Most executives are still focused on specific skills and education when shopping for a workforce, he says. But the health of a prospective location's population is becoming more critical., I think just around the corner in terms of being at least something that's going to be critically looked at more and more, if not become a standard in the overall process of location analysis, Marsh says., Even as the Chamber of Commerce's Brough puts the Mile High City at the forefront of that trend, she's worried about Colorado losing its edge. Colorado ranks 29th in the country in childhood obesity, and that rate is rising faster than most other places in the country., She's making her own staff more conscious health and urging other business leaders to do the same. And the group is a partner in the state's big collaborative effort to improve childhood nutrition and encourage exercise., This story is part of a partnership between NPR, Colorado Public Radio and Kaiser Health News.
The federal government each year gives needy college students billions of dollars they don't have to pay back $34.5 billion to be exact. More than 9 million students rely on the Pell Grant program. But a new study says much of the money is going to people who never graduate., Sandy Baum, an expert on student financial aid, has been leading a group in a study of the 48-year-old Pell Grant program. Their report, commissioned by the nonprofit College Board, confirms what many have known for years about grant recipients., We have always known that the completion rates are lower than what we'd like them to be, Baum says. But what we really learned was that there are so many students who are not the traditional Pell Grant student, who are not young people from low-income families but rather are adults seeking to improve their labor force opportunities. So understanding how important Pell Grants are to these students, and how poorly designed they are to actually serve these students, was something of an awakening., Baum says these are people 25 years and older who were hit hard by the recession lost their jobs, went back for more training and education, but have struggled to complete their schooling., Baum says they get little or no guidance about what to study or even what school to choose., If you're an adult, you're more likely to see a sign on the bus or hear that your neighbor went to school someplace. You really don't have many options, she says., Older, nontraditional students, Baum says, now make up nearly half of all Pell Grant recipients, but only 3 percent ever earn a bachelor's degree., High dropout rates, though, are not limited to older students. Among 18- to 25-year-olds in the program, only a fraction earn a bachelor's degree within six years often because they're just not ready for college-level work., Sophia Zaman, a recent graduate from the University of Massachusetts, Amherst, says Pell Grant recipients like her don't drop out because they can't handle the work higher tuition and fees push them out., I have numerous friends who were unable to afford taking on a fourth year of college because and my university was not unique we faced a 16 percent tuition increase, she says., Zaman, who now lobbies Congress on behalf of the U.S. Student Association, says the $8,600 she received in Pell Grants over four years wasn't enough. She still had to work three part-time jobs to make ends meet., Researchers agree that Pell Grants cover only a fraction of what they once covered. Their key finding, however, is that the Pell Grant program must now serve two equally needy but very different populations young and old.
Marchers at the state capitol building in Austin, Texas, in February protest working conditions in the state's construction sector., Marchers at the state capitol building in Austin, Texas, in February protest working conditions in the state's construction sector., Like almost everything in the Texas, the construction industry in the Lone Star State is big. One in every 13 workers here is employed in the state's $54 billion-per-year construction industry., Homebuilding and commercial construction may be an economic driver for the state, but it's also an industry riddled with hazards. Years of illegal immigration have pushed wages down, and accidents and wage fraud are common. Of the nearly 1 million workers laboring in construction here, approximately half are undocumented., Many of those workers have been in the U.S. for years, even decades. This critical mass of eager, mostly Hispanic workers means it's possible for a family from New York or California to move to Texas and buy a brand new, five-bedroom, 3,000-square-foot home for $160,000., Just how cheap is the cheap labor in Texas? Sometimes, it's free. Guillermo Perez, 41, is undocumented and has been working commercial construction jobs in Austin for 13 years., [The employer] said he didn't have the money to pay me and he owed me $1,200, Perez says of one job. I told him that I'm going to the Texas Workforce Commission, which I did. Then after that, he came back two weeks later and paid me., Perez is brave. Undocumented workers are usually too afraid to complain to Texas authorities, even when they go home with empty pockets. And they almost never talk to reporters., Widespread Wage Theft, The economic collapse of 2008 brought with it an onslaught of wage theft, according to the Austin-based Workers Defense Project. At the end of the week, construction workers sometimes walk away with $4 or $5 an hour, sometimes less, sometimes nothing., Ninety percent of the people who come to our organization have come because they've been robbed of their wages, says Cristina Tzintzun, the Workers Defense Project executive director., The organization has co-authored a report with the University of Texas, Austin, that examines working conditions in the Texas construction industry. For more than a year, WDP staff and University of Texas faculty canvassed Texas construction sites, surveying hundreds of workers and gathering information about pay, benefits, working conditions and employment and residency status., Cheated workers keep working, Tzintzun says, because contractors dangle wages like bait from one week to another, paying just enough to keep everybody on the hook., Two workers died when a crane collapsed under windy conditions at a University of Texas, Dallas, campus site in July 2012. OSHA cited the construction company with six serious safety violations and levied a $30,000 penalty., Two workers died when a crane collapsed under windy conditions at a University of Texas, Dallas, campus site in July 2012. OSHA cited the construction company with six serious safety violations and levied a $30,000 penalty., We're talking large commercial projects, even state and county projects, she says. So it's a problem that's widespread in the industry., If wage theft is a nasty cousin of slavery, Tzintzun says there's a deeper, more fundamental sickness affecting the Texas construction industry: the misclassification of construction workers as independent contractors instead of as employees., We found that 41 percent of construction workers, regardless of immigration status, were misclassified as subcontractors, she says., It works like this: Pretend you're an interior contractor, drop by the Home Depot parking lot and pick up four Hispanic guys to install Sheetrock for $8 an hour., By law, these men are your employees, even if just for the day. But in Texas, as in many other states, it's popular to pretend they're each independent contractors business owners. Which means you are not paying for their labor but for their business services., With this arrangement, the contractor you don't have to pay Social Security taxes or payroll taxes or workers' compensation or overtime. Instead, you pretend the undocumented Hispanic worker you've just paid in cash is going to pay all those state and federal taxes out of his $8 an hour himself., Our estimation is that there's $1.6 billion being lost in federal income taxes just from Texas alone, says the Workers Defense Project's Tzintzun. The report estimates that $7 billion in wages from nearly 400,000 illegally classified construction workers is going unreported in Texas each year, resulting in billions of dollars in revenue lost owing to institutionalized statewide payroll fraud., It's really the Wild West out there, Tzintzun says., A Dangerous State For A Dangerous Industry, Making a dangerous but profitable living has long been part of the Texas ethos. Handsomely paid and heavily mustached Texas Rangers died atop their horses chasing bandits and Comanches; since 1901, so-called roughnecks flush with cash have lost their fingers, and sometimes their lives, working Texas oil rigs., But working Texas construction is a good way to die while not making a good living. More construction workers die in Texas than in any other state, the WDP-UT study finds. With 10.7 deaths per 100,000 workers in 2010, construction workers in the lightly regulated Lone Star State died at twice the rate as those in California, with a rate of 5.2. That's compared with the U.S. rate of 8.8 in that same year., Take the story of 48-year-old Angel Hurtado, an undocumented roofer who died at an Austin warehouse site that had fallen behind schedule. He plummeted 20 feet to a concrete floor, hitting his head on a girder as he fell., Standing on the back road in the upscale Austin suburb of West Lake Hills where his father died, Angel's son Christian grows quiet and sad. His mother was also working at the site that day and saw her husband fall. She cradled his broken head in her lap, hysterical with grief., When Christian arrived, the subcontractor took him aside and promised to pay for his father's funeral, Christian says. The next day, we never see this guy. He never pick up the phone. We never hear anything from him, and he never called us back., According to the study, 1 in every 5 Texas construction workers will require hospitalization because of injuries on the job. Texas is the only state in the nation without mandatory workers' compensation, meaning hospitals and taxpayers usually end up shouldering the cost when uncovered construction workers are hurt., And who profits from the system in Texas? Remember that five-bedroom house for $160,000? Customers are the winners, workers are the losers and many construction firm owners have been transformed into the exploiters., That's not the case for all construction firms, of course. But for many smaller contractors and subcontractors who together make up the majority of the industry here it's exploit your workers and cheat the taxpayers or go out of business. Those are the cold hard Texas construction industry facts., Thursday on Morning Edition, Wade Goodwyn examines the Texas construction industry from the other side from the contractor's perspective.
How will you pay for your kids' college?, How will you pay for your kids' college?, It's college touring season, and many parents are on the road with their teenagers, driving from school to school and thinking about the college application and financial aid process that looms ahead., Many baby boomers have already been through this stage with their kids, but because the generation spans about 20 years, others still have kids at home. So how should boomers plan to pay for school when, on average, students graduate from college in the U.S. with $25,000 in debt?, Ron Lieber, who writes about personal finance for The New York Times, tells Morning Edition's David Greene about planning strategies and pitfalls to avoid., Think about college costs in chunks., It's something I picked up from Kevin McKinley, who runs a financial planning practice in Wisconsin. His basic insight is that you should divide it in chunks. He was thinking about the $60,000/all-in four-year cost. He basically looked at it like this: Think about saving $20,000 before the kid starts, which is a reasonably easy thing to do if you do it over 18 years. Then spend $20,000 out of your current earnings during the time that your child is in college. It might mean some sacrifices some very careful budgeting, a lot of rice and beans on the table but it's doable. And then borrow $20,000. When you start to divide it into chunks, it starts to seem at least within the realm of the possible., Your kid has been admitted to an expensive private school? Time to get real., Learn more about average college costs. , More on student loans. , Not touring colleges quite yet? Figure out how much school will cost when it's your child's time. , You have to begin by having a truly honest conversation with yourself about the emotional framework for this decision because that's where all big-money decisions start. First, there's this feeling of 'Can I or should I say no to my child who wants to go to a $60,000-a-year school when they've already gotten admission to the flagship public university in our state that only costs $20,000?' And then there's the question of 'Is it worth it? What am I getting for the extra $40,000 and would we be able to pay our own debt back if we were to support the dream of our child?' These are all deeply emotional decisions, and you have to begin by acknowledging that it's feelings that are on the table first before you look at the hard science of the numbers., Is there a hard line to draw for taking on debt?, For kids, I just think it's unwise to take on any debt beyond whatever the federal student loan limits are. They're generally just above $30,000. There's a new system in place that allows you to pay back your federal student loans purely on the basis of how much income you have after you finish school. So that keeps students from getting too far into the hole. If they take on an additional set of loans, the payback mechanisms and sort-of bailout provisions are much less flexible., For the parents, it's much more complicated: How old are the parents? How much money do they already have saved in retirement? Do you have the ability to earn income if you deplete your assets or don't save as much for retirement because you're paying $60,000 a year instead of $20,000 a year? This is where you have to start to get deep into the weeds, but it's a complicated set of choices., Worst-case scenarios, Last year we did a series of stories about student debt and all of the consequences of taking too much on and I ran across more than a handful of cases where it wasn't the students who were in bankruptcy court, it was the parents ... or sometimes a grandparent or an aunt or an uncle who had signed on as a co-signer to a student loan. And then they got into a situation where they lost their job at age 58 or 62 or they ran into a terrible medical problem and had a ton of expenses and all of a sudden this debt was no longer affordable and they had to go to court and basically beg a federal judge for a discharge, which is very, very difficult to get in a student loan case., You have to admire the sacrifices that people are willing to take on and they think they know what the future holds but sometimes they don't, and so it's really important to think hard about what the worst-case scenario might be and what it is you're going to do to avoid it.
A chart shows the sharp rise of bitcoin against the U.S. dollar in the past five days. Only two months after exchange rates put a single bitcoin's value at around $20, it surpassed $200 Tuesday., A chart shows the sharp rise of bitcoin against the U.S. dollar in the past five days. Only two months after exchange rates put a single bitcoin's value at around $20, it surpassed $200 Tuesday., Bitcoin, the digital currency that trades outside the control of central banks and international borders, reached new heights Tuesday, surpassing the $200 mark for the first time. That level comes just five days after bitcoin approached $150, a development that Mt.Gox, the largest exchange service for the currency, deemed to be epic., Bitcoin's rise has been sharp. It was only two months ago that exchange rates put a single bitcoin's value at around $20., Because the digital currency's new gains have coincided with deep economic uncertainty in Cyprus, Spain, and elsewhere, some have suggested that a bubble was being created. As fears over inflation and even steep withdrawal fees rose, experts said, so did bitcoin. And if those fears waned, so would the currency's value., But Jon Matonis of the Bitcoin Foundation tells Der Spiegel that he doesn't believe the connection is as direct as people think., Most transactions are still coming from affluent regions, like the United States and Northern Europe, he says. What we are seeing is not a Cyprus bubble., At Mt.Gox, which says it conducts more than 420,000 bitcoin trades each month, the digital currency didn't just plateau at the $200 mark. It plowed past it Tuesday, hitting a high of $240. As Jason Dorrier at Singularity Hub points out, that volatility is also linked to the currency's small size., Bitcoin's popularity has also been linked to activities some governments may disapprove of, or seek to tax. NPR reported on its role in online gambling earlier this year. And a New York Times story this week also noted bitcoin's acceptance by Silk Road, a website often used as a market for controlled substances and narcotics., Bitcoin's growth has led to changes at Mt.Gox, which announced last month that it would limit the maximum amount of monthly withdrawals to between $50,000 and $500,000, depending on customers' verified or trusted status., Whatever the cause, bitcoin's gains have translated into new wealth for people who bought into it since it was created in 2009. The currency is released at a very steady rate roughly every 10 minutes 25 new bitcoins come into circulation, as NPR's Steve Henn reported last week., Its adherents say that regular pace, and the fact that there is only a finite number of bitcoins, make it an attractive alternative to government-backed currencies. Just over half of the 21 million bitcoins in existence have so far been released., And the currency is gaining wide attention, with TechCrunch explaining how to mine bitcoins, and Forbes offering four reasons bitcoin is worth studying. Back in 2011, NPR's Planet Money team acquired some bitcoins, in an experiment that ended when robbers looted the virtual bank that had been holding the currency., One miner, Chris Koss, has his entire life savings in bitcoins something he recently told Steve Henn has brought big gains, as well as worries over how long the boom will continue., Its steep rise has made some folks wistful for the bitcoins they frittered away on, well, fritters some cafes and bars in the U.S. and Europe accept bitcoins. And others have felt new pangs of regret for bitcoins they lost when a hard-drive suffered a catastrophic failure., That's the case for Stefan Thomas, a programmer who tells Der Spiegel, I once lost 7,000 bitcoins, because I had forgotten to make a backup copy., If Thomas had held onto those bitcoins, they would be worth around $1.4 million today.
Matthew Marcus works at his desk in the basement of Kansas City Startup Village in Kansas City, Kan., in January. The village houses several startup companies and takes advantage of the high-speed Internet. Google announced on Tuesday it would be installing its Google Fiber network in Austin, Texas, next., Matthew Marcus works at his desk in the basement of Kansas City Startup Village in Kansas City, Kan., in January. The village houses several startup companies and takes advantage of the high-speed Internet. Google announced on Tuesday it would be installing its Google Fiber network in Austin, Texas, next., Google announced Tuesday that its Google Fiber project would be hitting Austin, Texas, next. The company says Austin, famous for its South by Southwest festival, is a mecca for creativity and entrepreneurialism, with thriving artistic and tech communities., Google Fiber is the tech giant's blazing fast Internet service, with current rates at 1 Gpbs, about 100 times faster than your typical cable broadband Internet service. It debuted in Kansas City in 2012., So why might we want a connection that fast?, The most obvious answer, reports NPR tech correspondent Steve Henn on All Things Considered, is that services we already use will run faster like streaming movies and online gaming., But Google's real argument, Henn says, is more far-reaching., [Google's argument] is that if you connect American homes to the Internet at these gigabit speeds, all kinds of Internet services and business that right now are basically impossible become possible, he says., It's still unclear what Google's ultimate goal is with Google Fiber, Henn says, whether the company wants to become an Internet service provider or if this is simply an experiment., But one thing is clear, he says, unlike Comcast or Time Warner, when Google hooks up a home to fiber it's not just going to be making money on monthly fees., Strategically, Google is perfectly positioned to use these high-speed connections to make all sorts of sophisticated software and services available online for free and support them with ads., This will put Google in direct competition with other Internet providers, so much so that AT&T; also announced on Tuesday that it would be creating a 1 Gbps fiber-optic network in Austin as well., But Google has a long way to go. TechCrunch reports that it would cost the company an estimated $11 billion to roll out the network and TV service to 20 million more homes., Kansas City's Year With Fiber, In March of 2011, Google announced that Kansas City, Mo., and Kansas City, Kan., had been selected as the first areas where it would install its fiber network., After all is said and done, Google is expected to spend about $94 million for the Kansas City project to connect roughly 149,000 homes to the high-speed network. But KCUR's Sylvia Maria Gross reports on All Things Considered that the rollout there has been slow going., So far, only 3,000 to 4,000 people are connected, and it's taken about a year longer than expected to get those customers up and running. Local governments and businesses are still trying to figure out how the technology could transform sectors like education, health care and the arts., Aaron Deacon, managing director for KC Digital Drive, a community-driven effort created to think of ways to take advantage of the service, says it's not really about the technology but defining goals for the future., Having the technology in place forces people to really focus, and sort of ... recalibrate and say, 'OK, the future is a little closer than maybe we thought it was,' Deacon says., Deacon says Google Fiber has attracted funding for business incubators and other digital ventures, like Code for America, which helps local governments engage with citizens online. One way Google Fiber is already making a difference is in the marketplace; other cable operators are offering all sorts of deals for conventional broadband., Google's pricing is currently seen as a little expensive; $70 a month for Internet or $120 a month to include the Google TV service., Michael Liimatta, who heads the nonprofit Connecting for Good, aimed at bridging the digital divide, says he's disappointed that Google Fiber is only coming to neighborhoods where enough residents sign up, leaving out the poorest communities. Originally, Google had said it would help bring its high-speed Internet to those who don't have access. Still, Liimatta credits Google with starting the conversation., Even if Google is not necessarily the vehicle for achieving a lot of this stuff, they certainly are to be praised for getting us to be thinking about a lot of this, he says.
After an unsuccessful face-lift attempt by Ron Johnson, J.C. Penney will be led by former CEO Myron Ullman. Some analysts say this might be it for the retailer; others say it must embrace its customers to recuperate., After an unsuccessful face-lift attempt by Ron Johnson, J.C. Penney will be led by former CEO Myron Ullman. Some analysts say this might be it for the retailer; others say it must embrace its customers to recuperate., A year and a half ago, J.C. Penney's then-brand new CEO Ron Johnson undertook what was supposed to be a transformation of the 110-year-old department store. Yesterday, the retailer cut his tenure short., J.C. Penney lost nearly $1 billion last year as customer traffic dropped off., Now, it's bringing back former Chief Executive Officer Myron Ullman to try to stanch the bleeding., The fanfare that originally accompanied Johnson seemed well-placed. He previously headed retail for Apple, and before that for Target, both of which had flourished., 'Decluttering', At Johnson's first big investor presentation last year, hired spokeswoman Ellen DeGeneres talked about giving J.C. Penney a breath of fresh air., We're fine with growing old; we're not fine with growing stale, she said in the ad., Johnson unveiled ambitious plans, including an expensive makeover of the stores, as well as a new pricing scheme., We're going to learn that the best days aren't in the rearview mirror, they're right down the road, he said., Johnson touted his plan as decluttering offering goods at low prices, but getting rid of coupons and complicated discounting regimes. But Marshal Cohen, the chief retail analyst with The NPD Group, says consumers saw it very differently., When you offered consumers discounts and now take it away, the first thing the consumer is going to look for is the discount, Cohen says. And if you don't provide them with a discount, they're going to go somewhere else that does., And they did in droves. So did investors. The stock price is half what it was when Johnson took office., 'Right Idea,' But Too Fast, Cohen says many of Johnson's ideas like restructuring stores around specialty brands might eventually work in department stores. But J.C. Penney pushed too hard, too fast., To change the dynamic at retail is the right idea. It's just, it doesn't happen as quickly from the consumer level as a retail management necessarily would like, Cohen says., He says now J.C. Penney will have to get very aggressive on prices to win back disaffected customers, and do so by back-to-school season., Some analysts believe J.C. Penney's goose is already cooked. It's still losing money, it's lost many of its executives, and it's stuck midway through a failing turnaround plan. Plus, the retailer faces mounting competition from online retailers and other discount operations like Kohl's, T.J. Maxx and others that have capitalized on J.C. Penney's stumbles. Perhaps, analysts say, J.C. Penney is better off selling its assets., Getting Back To Its Roots, Alex Fuhrman, a Piper Jaffray analyst, says he doesn't think so. He says J.C. Penney made a critical mistake by rolling out a sweeping pricing change before testing it on a small scale at some of its stores., The richness of data that's available to some of these retailers is really incredible, Fuhrman says. And for retailers to not take advantage of that, it's something you're not going to see as much of going forward., But, he says, J.C. Penney has enough cash and enough historic brand recognition that it can still stand alone., They need to embrace who their customer really is and go after that, Fuhrman says., The return of previous CEO Ullman indicates J.C. Penney's board is less focused on a dramatic revamp, and more interested in just getting it back to financial stability.
KPMG has withdrawn as auditor of Herbalife and Skechers USA after the accounting firm revealed that one of its partners may have sold inside information on the companies to a third-party stock trader., Nutrient-supplement seller Herbalife briefly halted activity in its shares after the revelation, only reopening trading Tuesday afternoon. The company's stock was down 21 cents at $38.18 Tuesday. The broader market was mixed., Both Herbalife and footwear maker Skechers said there was no reason to believe that their financial statements had been materially misstated., According to The New York Times:, The news of possible insider trading emerged in an unusual fashion late Monday, when KPMG announced on its Web site that it had fired a senior partner in its Los Angeles office because of the suspected passing of confidential information to an unnamed individual 'who then used that information in stock trades involving several West Coast companies.', The firm said it had to resign as auditor from several companies 'after concluding today that the firm's independence has been impacted' because of the partner's behavior. It added that the partner acted 'with deliberate disregard for KPMG's long-standing culture of professionalism and integrity.' , As The Associated Press reports:, The development comes at an awkward time for Herbalife. Hedge fund mogul Bill Ackman has publicly accused of it distorting its financial information. Herbalife has shot back, saying Ackman just wants to push the stock down for his own profit. Ackman has bet the stock would fall., In a statement on Tuesday, Skechers said upon the KPMG partner's resignation, the company was informed by KPMG that KPMG's lead Audit Engagement Partner on the Skechers account is under federal investigation for providing non-public information of his clients to a third party in exchange for money. The third party then used that information to trade stocks of several West Coast companies.
A Ford Focus ST was on display at the 2013 North American International Auto Show in Detroit in January., A Ford Focus ST was on display at the 2013 North American International Auto Show in Detroit in January., Which Japanese-manufactured car is the world's most popular vehicle? Maybe none of them. It might just be the Ford Focus., More than a million Focus models were sold worldwide last year, with Toyota's Corolla coming in second. Next was Ford's top-selling F-Series pickup, sold almost exclusively in the U.S. and Canada, according to the marketing firm R.L. Polk., Still, there's one caveat. As The Wall Street Journal points out:, Last fall, Ford made a similar claim using IHS Automotive data and courted some umbrage from Toyota, which calls its Corolla other names in different countries, including an Auris in Europe., So Ford is careful to say the Focus is the best-selling 'nameplate' for any vehicle in the world. The Focus compact is sold globally and has started to pick up steam in China, padding Ford's lead over the Corolla name., In any case, here's the Top 10 from Polk:, 1 Ford Focus 1,020,410 2 Toyota Corolla 872,774 3 Ford F-Series 785,630 4 Wuling Zhiguang 768,870 5 Toyota Camry 729,793 6 Ford Fiesta 723,130 7 VW Golf 699,148 8 Chevrolet Cruze 661,325 9 Honda Civic 651,159 10 Honda CR-V 624,982, According to The Detroit News:, Ford sells the Focus in more than 100 countries and the car has become a huge success in China. The automaker sold nearly 300,000 Focus cars in China last year, after an all-new Focus made its debut in March. Ford sells two Focus cars in that market an older-generation, or 'Classic' Focus, and the current generation that is sold around the globe., What's the Wuling Zhiguang, you ask? The company's Sunshine is one of the hottest-selling minivans in China.
In New York and Washington, government regulators are cracking down on insider trading, the illegal practice in which people with internal information about important company events make stock market trades before ordinary investors find out what's happening., In recent months, regulators have launched a series of high-profile arrests and investigations. Even Congress has gotten into the spirit of things, voting to ban insider trading by members., Now, social scientists are muscling in on the action, too., In a new study accepted for publication in the Journal of Finance, Henk Berkman at the University of Auckland, Paul Koch at the University of Kansas and Joakim Westerholm at the University of Sydney have uncovered a novel way to spot insider trading., The researchers tracked half a million stock market accounts over a 15-year period between 1995 and 2010. The accounts were in Finland on the Nasdaq OMX Helsinki Exchange. Why Finland? It offered researchers unusual access to information about trades and information about investors, including their age., To their surprise, when the researchers analyzed the data according to investor age, the accounts belonging to the youngest children blew all the others out of the water in terms of performance., We were very surprised when we first found this evidence, Koch said. Again, we were not looking for the result we found. The group [of accounts belonging to children between the ages of zero and 10 years old] seemed to outperform all the others., Koch isn't implying that babies know how to make the right picks in the stock market. The people operating these children's accounts were their parents and guardians., Exactly how the researchers made the connection between a child's account and the guardian's without knowing either person's name and without violating Finnish confidentiality laws is an interesting bit of sleuthing on its own. First they got data about individual accounts that had the same last name, Koch says, but without being told what the actual names were. They next looked to make sure the pair of accounts had the same ZIP code, and that trades of the same stocks were made on the same day, and in the same buy/sell direction in both accounts. Only then would the researchers assume that transactions in both accounts might be being guided by the same person., We find that underaged account holders exhibit superior stock-picking skills on both the buy side and the sell side over the days immediately following trades, Koch and his colleagues report in their study. Accounts belonging to children (and managed by their guardians) appeared to be especially prescient when it came to major company events such as merger or takeover announcements., Since this outperformance is especially evident for short horizons, the researchers write, it likely stems from superior private information that is about to become public., Think about takeover announcements: Typically, these announcements cause large stock market swings. The researchers found that adults made the right calls about 50 percent of the time before a takeover announcement what you'd expect in a world where people don't have special expertise or information., The accounts belonging to kids made trades in the right direction 72 percent of the time after takeover announcements. Koch says this produced a post-takeover return of 12 percent. (That isn't 12 percent per year. It's 12 percent per day.), When the researchers drilled down further, they found something really interesting: The guardians of these kids who were making these spectacular calls weren't nearly as successful when they made investments through their own accounts., Guardians are willing to trade on behalf of their children to earn these extraordinary returns, but they are reticent to trade through their own account, Koch says. One reason would be a fear of getting caught breaking an insider-trading law., Koch said that the results suggested that regulators who want to track insider trading might want to pay close attention to high-performing accounts belonging to underaged children. It's not that every profitable account the scientists identified was involved in insider trading one would expect roughly half the guardians to make the right call just by chance. But as a group, these underage accounts did much better than chance would predict., I asked Koch whether his findings from Finland were applicable to the United States. He said they were and that, while information about trades and traders might not be as readily accessible to researchers, they were likely available to the Securities and Exchange Commission, which investigates violations and enforces insider trading laws., Koch says regulators have expressed interest in his findings., I've found that the people who I know are the best fishermen go where the fish are, he says. And the regulators have their own fishing expedition. We would suggest that the age of the account holder might point to a better place to catch some fish.
Main Street in Webster City, Iowa, has so far survived the 2011 closure of an Electrolux factory. But retraining funds and unemployment are running out for former workers, leaving businesses worried that a serious downturn is ahead., Main Street in Webster City, Iowa, has so far survived the 2011 closure of an Electrolux factory. But retraining funds and unemployment are running out for former workers, leaving businesses worried that a serious downturn is ahead., What becomes of a city of 8,000 people when its main employer leaves town? What does it look like, and what does it feel like? I set out to answer those questions on a trip to Webster City, Iowa, last month, as part of my report on the Swedish appliance maker Electrolux., On March 31, 2011, Electrolux shut its washer-dryer plant in Webster City and sent the jobs to Juarez, Mexico. The employees were warned more than a year in advance of the closure, and many used the time to pay off debt and begin thinking about a new career., Because their jobs had left the country, the laid-off workers qualified for federally funded retraining. A large number enrolled in two-year programs at community colleges and have been living off unemployment benefits as they learn new skills., Now, two years on, the retraining is wrapping up and Webster City is bracing for the real impact of the plant closure. There's a sense of uncertainty on Main Street., When their training is done, there's no jobs. So you have to go where you have a job, says Vicki Olson, owner of the local True Value hardware store., At C &amp; C American Tap, business is down sharply. Before the plant closed, the bar had three happy hours a day one for each Electrolux shift. Thursday nights were the busiest, when workers could come in and cash their paychecks., It was wall-to-wall people. So busy, says owner Viola Christian. Them were the days., Electrolux's former warehouse and distribution center in Webster City, Iowa, is up for sale. The plant itself, across the street, will soon be demolished., Electrolux's former warehouse and distribution center in Webster City, Iowa, is up for sale. The plant itself, across the street, will soon be demolished., Sue Erickson's Mane Attraction hair salon, set across from the town's movie theater, is decorated with old movie memorabilia. The salon has been doing OK, but the theater closed down March 7., Erickson's husband was a tool and die maker at the plant and has retrained as an electrician. She's confident he'll find work but knows it will pay far less than the $23 an hour he was making at Electrolux., The plant itself is just a couple of blocks from Main Street. It takes up several city blocks and has vast amounts of parking to accommodate the multitudes of workers who used to drive in from out of town. In early March, those parking lots were blanketed in snow, with not even a single footprint marring the landscape., Soon, the entire plant will be just a fenced-in field. Webster City recently approved Electrolux's demolition permit. Electrolux says it hasn't yet decided what it will do with the land, but city officials expect the company to hold on to it., David Toyer, Webster City's economic developer, tries to remain upbeat. Electrolux's departure means the city has to diversify its employment base, which everyone believes is a good thing. We do have an available workforce, a skilled workforce in manufacturing. We also have available land. We have an abundance of available utility infrastructure. We're shovel-ready, he says., But where to put those shovels?, Since Electrolux left, the city has bid on a handful of new projects that would have created a few hundred jobs each, but success has been elusive. The most promising prospect, an electric car venture, went bankrupt. Now the city is trying to recoup a $790,000 economic development loan for the project., Toyer is focused on expanding existing businesses while still trying to draw in newcomers. Perhaps the biggest hurdle is the fact that many people have never even heard of Webster City. Our biggest job, always, will be to get Webster City out there as a known name. That's a daunting task, he says., Iowa State University economist David Swenson says what's happening in Webster City is a familiar story throughout the Midwest. A major manufacturer relocates elsewhere, taking well-paying jobs along with it. New employers come in, but with fewer jobs and lower wages. The local economy contracts and eventually finds a new equilibrium., In Swenson's mind, that's OK. He's posed this question to communities:, What's wrong with declining? What's wrong with going down to a level that you can perhaps sustain yourself? he asks them. It doesn't mean that your community is going away. It doesn't mean it can't be a good place to live and a great place to raise your family., All of the former workers I spoke with in Webster City said they planned to stay there. They own their homes and can't imagine how they would move., Webster City Mayor Janet Adams knows that things will continue to be hard for some families, but she's also relieved that the Electrolux closure is behind them., We'll get through this. Other places have, and we will too, she says.
A J.C. Penney story in Plano, Texas., A J.C. Penney story in Plano, Texas., After an unsuccessful makeover of the retailer J.C. Penney, Ron Johnson, the company's chief executive, is out., In a press release, the company said Myron Mike Ullman, who was the company's previous CEO, is retaking the reins., While J.C. Penney has faced a difficult period, its legacy as a leader in American retailing is an asset that can be built upon and leveraged, Ullman said in a statement. To that end, my plan is to immediately engage with the Company's customers, team members, vendors and shareholders, to understand their needs, views and insights., The Wall Street Journal explains Johnson joined J.C. Penny from Apple. He was given a $53.3 million pay package to make the move. The Journal adds:, But Mr. Johnson's strategy of filling Penney with branded boutiques and doing away with clearances and coupons appeared to alienate its core shoppers. The company lost $4.3 billion in sales in 2012, after Mr. Johnson took the helm; declines accelerated throughout the year. In the fourth quarter, including the crucial holiday season, sales dropped 28.4%, contributing to a net loss of $552 million, the worst of the year., The company held $930 million in cash on Feb. 2, a decline of 38% from a year earlier., Business Insider reports that when news of Johnson's ouster hit Wall Street, J.C. Penny stocks jumped in after-hours trading. Once the company announced it was brining back Ullman, the price tumbled.
Electrolux's new plant in Memphis, Tenn., is the Swedish appliance company's most modern and high-tech facility. The factory will open this summer while an Electrolux plant in Quebec, Canada, is being shuttered., Electrolux's new plant in Memphis, Tenn., is the Swedish appliance company's most modern and high-tech facility. The factory will open this summer while an Electrolux plant in Quebec, Canada, is being shuttered., The United States lost close to 6 million manufacturing jobs between 2000 and 2009. Now, slowly, some of those jobs are coming back. Over the past three years, the U.S. economy has gained a half-million manufacturing jobs., But even with the manufacturing recovery, there are both winners and losers and sometimes they're created by the same company., Take the case of the Swedish manufacturer Electrolux. A century ago, it got its start in vacuum cleaners, and now it makes a wide range of appliances. It's the world's second-largest appliance manufacturer behind Whirlpool, owns the Frigidaire brand and makes Kenmore products as well., In 2004, Electrolux began a major restructuring, shuffling jobs from high-cost to low-cost areas, from Sweden to Hungary, from England to Poland and from Denmark to Thailand. This summer, Electrolux will begin moving jobs from a town outside Montreal to Memphis, Tenn., where it will begin production of ovens and stoves in a brand-new, high-tech plant., With the move, Electrolux will go from paying a base union wage of close to $19 an hour in Canada to roughly one-third less in Memphis. The company is expected to eventually hire about 1,200 people at the Memphis location., 'Back To The Future', Jack Truong, president and CEO of Electrolux Major Appliances North America, won't speculate on how long the company might stay in Memphis. The company has not committed to a minimum amount of time, but Truong says Electrolux is committed to working with Memphis to build success so that it can stay there for the long term., Memphis Mayor A C Wharton is delighted about the jobs. We're actually going back to the future here. This used to be a heavy manufacturing city, he says., Memphis Mayor A C Wharton (left) with Jack Truong of Electrolux at the company's new plant. The city used a large incentive package to entice the company., Memphis Mayor A C Wharton (left) with Jack Truong of Electrolux at the company's new plant. The city used a large incentive package to entice the company., Wharton and other officials are trying to reclaim some of the city's past, and they're using huge sums of money to do it. In 2011, as part of an investigative series, the Memphis newspaper the Commercial Appeal calculated that the city of Memphis, Shelby County and the state of Tennessee together had come up with subsidies of $188 million to land Electrolux., Mark Herbison, senior vice president for economic development at the Greater Memphis Chamber, says the group learned in negotiations that there was an offer of more than $100 million on the table from Mexico to attract Electrolux. To compete, he says, Memphis would have to be in the same ballpark., The state government came forward with a large offer, Herbison says, motivated in part by the fact that Tennessee already has an Electrolux plant outside Nashville. If the project went to Mexico, Tennessee officials feared that plant, making ovens and stoves, might go, too., A Bitter Loss In Iowa, And it wasn't just a theory. Communities elsewhere in the U.S. had already lost Electrolux jobs to Mexico. One of them was Webster City, Iowa, population 8,000. In 2011, Electrolux closed a washer-dryer plant there and sent the jobs to Juarez., The plant once employed 2,000 Iowans, including Jerry Kloberdanz and seven of his siblings., The wages were better than anyplace else within 30 to 40 miles. The benefits were very good. I was making $22.17 [an hour] when they closed the plant, he says., Kloberdanz worked at the plant for 32 years. He thought it was a death sentence when he lost his job, he says, and was worried that he wouldn't be able to support his family., Now, with federal retraining funds, Kloberdanz is studying geographic information systems at a community college. He's optimistic he will find work in the field., Kloberdanz has a house full of Electrolux products but wouldn't consider buying another one today. I'm not going to be putting money in their pocket, he says. They took it all out of mine., Kloberdanz believes the company will go wherever wages are lowest and incentives are highest. A couple of years ago, that place was Mexico. Today, it may be Memphis. But for those looking for work at the new plant, Kloberdanz has a piece of advice:, Jerry Kloberdanz and seven family members were laid off when Electrolux closed its Webster City, Iowa, plant in 2011., Jerry Kloberdanz and seven family members were laid off when Electrolux closed its Webster City, Iowa, plant in 2011., Don't plan on retiring there. Because I don't think they'll stay there either., Truong, the company's North American president, says Electrolux is committed to working with Memphis to build success, so that it can stay there for the long term., I think the message for all of us is that it's very, very important that we always continue to innovate and come out with new products products the consumers continue to want, at the right quality and cost, Truong says. As we continue to grow and gain consumers, that's when business will thrive and employees will thrive., In Memphis, Hopes For Job Security, Back in Memphis, there's no trace of the cynicism you hear in Iowa only enthusiasm for a company that's brought the promise of jobs., In a classroom at Southwest Tennessee Community College, Memphis is helping Electrolux find and train workers. Job seekers spend four weeks in industrial readiness training, working on hard skills like math and mechanics, and soft skills like communication., Electrolux doesn't pay a penny for this class. Tuition is largely covered by taxpayers. The company does commit to sitting in on the class and interviewing every student, most of whom are unemployed or underemployed., Charlene Dearing, 56, quit her job at a dentist's office after her husband was diagnosed with Alzheimer's. He went to a nursing home, she lost their home to foreclosure, and today she gets by cleaning houses. She believes a job at Electrolux would bring a complete turnaround to her life., It's long term. It has excellent benefits. You can grow, and I plan to retire [here] if this is for me, she says, echoing the sentiments of many in the room., John Churchill, head of workforce development at Southwest Tennessee Community College, notes that most of the students in this class would not normally get an interview with a company like Electrolux. Few in Memphis have the manufacturing experience the company typically looks for, he says. Memphis is a logistics hub, dominated by FedEx, and many of the jobs, like those in warehouse and distribution, are lower-paying and require fewer skills., And so, Wharton, the mayor, sees great value in the jobs Electrolux is bringing to his city. He refuses to worry too much about what would happen if Electrolux were to leave., You will be better off even if that does happen, he says. You will have elevated the skill sets of your employees, their standard of living. How long should that last? Oh, I hope for eternity. But even if it does not, it's well worth it., Whatever the future in Memphis, it's clear that in today's global economy, it's companies that have the power to shop around, while communities are left to compete with each other all hoping they'll be winners, not losers.
In what would seem to be a contradiction, a respected study says that the quality of service provided by U.S. airlines remained near an all-time high last year even as passengers' complaints soared 22 percent., The 2013 Airline Quality Rating Report from researchers at Purdue University and Wichita State University shows almost no change from 2011, which according to the schools' formula was the best year U.S. airlines have had, in terms of quality. This is the 23rd year the report has been compiled., The researchers look at not just customer complaints, but also on-time performance, denied boardings and baggage problems. Complaints are up, Wichita State business professor Dean Headley tells The Associated Press, because airlines continue to pack planes, shrink seats, add charges and take other steps to boost revenue., But on-time performance improved. An estimated 81.8 percent of flights were on time in 2012 versus 80 percent the year before., Also on the plus side, there were fewer mishandled bags in 2012: 3.07 per 1,000 passengers versus 3.35 in 2011., Still, along with the number of complaints, the other bad news was that the number of involuntary denied boardings went up to 0.97 per 10,000 passengers last year from 0.78 in 2011., As for the airlines and where they rank in terms of quality, here's the latest list:, 1. Virgin America, 2. JetBlue, 3. Air Tran, 4. Delta, 5. Hawaiian, 6. Alaska, 7. Frontier, 8. Southwest, 9. US Airways, 10. American, 11. American Eagle, 12. SkyWest, 13. ExpressJet, 14. United
Three Central Bankers and a World on Fire, by Neil Irwin, Hardcover, 430 pages | purchase, More on this book:, As the U.S. economy struggles to recover from the financial crash, and Europe is buffeted by a series of banking crises, attention has focused on the presidents and prime ministers who've tried to cope with it all. Journalist Neil Irwin, an economics writer for The Washington Post, says there's an elite group of policymakers who can make enormously important decisions on their own, often deliberating in secret, and in many ways unaccountable to voters. In his new book, The Alchemists, Irwin profiles the central bankers the men and woman who control the money supply in their national economies., Irwin compares these bankers to the alchemists of yore. Charlatans, cranks and serious scientists alike once dreamed of turning routine materials into gold or silver. But since the invention of paper money in the 1660s, no such elaborate pseudosciences have been necessary to create money., You don't need a crazy potion to create value where there was none, Irwin tells Fresh Air's Dave Davies. It you have a central banker and you have a printing press and you have the authority of the state imbued in both, you can create money from thin air., In the U.S., the Federal Reserve Bank pumped hundreds of billions of dollars into the economy in recent years, prompting some in Congress to seek limits on the Fed's power. The Alchemists is both about the efforts of central bankers in recent years to contain crises, but also about the past blunders of central bankers, whose decisions have sometimes had ruinous consequences. Irwin, however, says he thinks they are learning from past mistakes., Interview Highlights, On how the regulation of banks has changed over time, Paper money had its start this time 350 years ago. What's remarkable is that we've learned a lot since then. There's a lot that we've learned about how you can control the banking system, how you can regulate banks, how you can if you are a central banker turn the dial of money supply. ...The idea that this is a dial over which people have control and governments have control is something that has only really developed in the last hundred years, as we've moved beyond the Gold Standard and toward this world of fiat money, where one thing you learn the more monetary history you study, is [that] money is an idea, it's not a physical object; it's an idea of, 'What is this value? What is the store value? What is money worth?' Why does money have value? Because people will take it as compensation for other things., &ldquo; The Fed meets eight times a year to discuss interest rate policy. We only find out exactly what they said at those meetings five years later. We get transcripts; that's not exactly a model of transparency. , - Neil Irwin, On the transparency of the Federal Reserve system, It's very much the case that we, as a society, have decided ... [that] there are some decisions that's better off being made by technocrats, by experts who can act quietly, who can act behind the scenes, and move quickly, and move on a scale commensurate to the problems. That's not to say it really fits with most of our democratic principles. The Fed meets eight times a year to discuss interest rate policy. We only find out exactly what they said at those meetings five years later. We get transcripts; that's not exactly a model of transparency. It is true that Ben Bernanke goes before Capitol Hill and answers questions over and over, and it's true that if you know how to read their minutes and the different documents they put out, you can glean a lot about what they're up to but it's very much a secretive institution. So if you're an advocate of transparency and democracy and a free flow of information, it's definitely the case that the Federal Reserve system and other central banks, for that matter, are not really what you want to see., Neil Irwin is a Washington Post columnist and the economics editor of Wonkblog. He reported on the economic crisis, particularly the role of central banking, from 2007-2012., Neil Irwin is a Washington Post columnist and the economics editor of Wonkblog. He reported on the economic crisis, particularly the role of central banking, from 2007-2012., On why the euro has exacerbated the current financial depressions in Europe, Normally what would happen when a country like Greece finds itself unable to pay its debts, is it would experience a run on its currency, and the value of its currency would plummet, and it would default on its debts, and that would be very difficult and very wrenching and not much fun for anybody. But it would also sow the seeds of the next expansion. So if you're Greece, suddenly your currency would depreciate by 50 percent, and that would make you much more competitive as a tourist destination, your exports would be more competitive, and so you would actually have the seeds of the future growth sown by that depreciation. ..., But instead, what we've had is an economic collapse in Greece while they're still using the euro so there's been no depreciation, so they're having to try and do that depreciation by having internal deflation. They're trying to have wages fall rather than it just happens automatically because the currency collapses. So what you have is a combination of a very difficult economic situation in Greece and some of the other European countries without the obvious path forward to get out of it and return to growth., &ldquo; There was no mechanism for trying to stop those banks from failing. It was kind of accepted, [that] this is a capitalist system. There's no deposit insurance. If your bank makes bad bets and goes under, well, you just lost your savings. Sorry, but that's how it is. , - Neil Irwin on the Great Depression, On why the Federal Reserve could have prevented the Great Depression , This was the ultimate failure of central banks to understand their role, to understand their powers, and to understand how to use them to try to keep mankind on a better course. So what happened narrowly is the stock market collapsed, there was a panic through global financial markets, and so, in the United States, there were a wave of bank failures; but there was no mechanism for trying to stop those banks from failing. It was kind of accepted, [that] this is a capitalist system. There's no deposit insurance. If your bank makes bad bets and goes under, well, you just lost your savings. Sorry, but that's how it is. ..., So as banks fail, suddenly there's less money circulating through the financial system, and when there's less money, prices tend to fall. So what happens is deflation sets in, companies cut jobs so unemployment rises, and this forms a vicious cycle. The worse the economy gets, the more banks fail; the more banks fail, the worse the economy gets. What you want to see happen is [for] the central bank [to] step in and prevent that vicious cycle from setting in. The Federal Reserve didn't have either the capacity or will to do that., Read an excerpt of The Alchemists
John Silloway fixes maple sap lines in Randolph, Vt., in February 2011., John Silloway fixes maple sap lines in Randolph, Vt., in February 2011., Eighteen different grades of maple syrup are displayed in East Montpelier, Vt., In Vermont, maple syrup is growing jobs and allowing farmers to make a profit., When most people imagine maple syrup production, they think of buckets hanging from trees collecting sap. But these days, most of that sap is collected by pipeline and vacuum pumps., Technological advances in the past decade have allowed Vermont's maple syrup producers to triple the number of taps they're putting in maple trees. They're getting twice as much sap per tree, which means more syrup and more money. Statewide, the crop brought in $40 million last year, doubling in value in just six years., At J.R. Sloan's sugarhouse in Fletcher, Vt., sap arrives in tanks on the back of huge trucks, where it's pumped underground into tubs. It's a model of efficiency. Years ago, producers had to boil all of the water out of sap to concentrate the syrup. Now, sap is sent though reverse osmosis machines, which filter most of the water out before boiling begins., The result is pure Vermont maple syrup., See what he's pulling off the rig right there? That's fancy, Sloan says. That's our best product you can make. That's the highest money., Sloan started out tapping 14,000 trees in the spring, even as he worked a full-time job. He was taking a chance when he built his sugarhouse. That cost $117,000 to build that, with all the equipment. And the first year, I grossed $239,000, he says. Syrup went wicked high that year. I got into it at just the right time., And it's been up ever since. Now he buys sap from up to 95,000 trees, and he has left his old job behind., Sloan works on his sugaring business year-round, including tapping trees and running pipelines for other landowners. He hopes to make 32,000 gallons of syrup this year. Like most of the syrup made in Vermont, it will be sold in bulk., Sloan isn't alone in making maple his primary source of income. Vermont now has 3,000 commercial maple producers up a third in just a decade., Even some dairy farmers who once sugared on the side have decided to sell their cows and focus on maple. One of them is Cecile Branon at Branon Family Maple Orchards. When she and her husband first started sugaring, they used horses and buckets., We miss our horses and stuff, and that whole feeling of horses and the tradition, Branon says. But to make it, to watch your labor and your time and efficiency, you've got to go with tubing, with a mainline system., Now the Branons and two sons tap 66,000 trees. She says they've bought over a $100,000 worth of high-tech equipment to handle that volume of sap., There's people that are getting into it feeling that this is a get-rich type of thing, she says. It's not. The investments that you have to make are unbelievable., And the sugarhouse has not only gotten bigger, it's been redone to meet food safety standards. They've switched to new taps that prevent the holes in trees from healing up, extending the season. Vacuum pumps also allow sap to flow even as the spring weather that sugarmakers depend on becomes less predictable., Weather and climate change will always be a concern, but even last year, when Vermont had 80-degree days in March, producers made more syrup than in most previous years.
Car2Go vehicles lined up in Washington, D.C., as the company prepared to launch service there last year. The car sharing service is also in Europe and other American cities, including Seattle; Austin, Texas; Miami; and Portland, Ore., Car2Go vehicles lined up in Washington, D.C., as the company prepared to launch service there last year. The car sharing service is also in Europe and other American cities, including Seattle; Austin, Texas; Miami; and Portland, Ore., As car sharing continues to gain traction among American drivers, Car2Go is one company benefiting from the changing way we use cars., Seattleite David Stewart doesn't own a car. Instead, the managing partner of a small social media company relies on Car2Go for getting around., He picks one up of the cars first thing in the morning in his neighborhood and drives to the local coffeehouse. He works for a couple of hours and when he's ready to visit a client, he grabs another car, which he finds on an app on his smartphone. He reserves a tiny two-passenger Smart car across the street., He swipes his membership card in front of a reader on the windshield to get in the car. Now it's confirming my account, and you wait until the car is unlocked and now we can get in and start driving, Stewart says., The idea is simple. Customers like Stewart take a car when they want it, drive it anywhere within the company's designated area and then just leave it. They might drive three or four different cars in a day, but pay only for the time they actually use the cars: 38 cents a minute, or if the trip is a long one, $14 an hour., For Stewart it adds up to $150 a month, a fraction of what a car payment plus gas parking and insurance would be., It's truly a flexible, on-demand service for our customers, says Nicholas Cole, who heads up North American operations for Car2Go. He says it's not just 20- and 30-somethings or college students who are using it so are retirees who've moved into the city and given up an automobile., Seattle is a great example. We launched Seattle right before Christmas, and here we are in April with over 18,000 people signed up, Cole says., &ldquo; People of my generation believed that our private automobile said a lot about who we are, that [it] defined our power and our status. The younger generations don't seem to be buying into that anymore, and they are seeing automobiles as simply a tool., - Jeffrey Tumlin, Nationwide, Car2Go claims about 90,000 members. Across the country about 10 times that number are using established car sharing services, according to Susan Shaheen, an expert in sustainable transportation at the University of California, Berkeley., What a lot of people are starting to see is the emergence of a lot of different companies and a lot of competition, Shaheen says., She says Zipcar was the first company to gain attention for renting out cars on a short-term basis. More recently, a company called DriveNow, like Car2Go, offers one-way options. (Zipcar requires that you return the vehicle to its reserved parking spot when you're done driving it.), And, says Shaheen, now we see things like peer-to-peer car sharing where you can actually put your own personal vehicle into a car sharing system. Shaheen counts 12 personal car sharing companies in North America as of last month., There's no question that economics are driving the car sharing market, but environmental concerns and the adaptation of smartphone technology are factors, too. So are cultural changes, says Jeffrey Tumlin of the transportation planning firm Nelson Nygaard., People of my generation believed that our private automobile said a lot about who we are, that [it] defined our power and our status. The younger generations don't seem to be buying into that anymore, and they are seeing automobiles as simply a tool, Tumlin says., It's hardly surprising then that automakers see car sharing as a potential new market. Daimler owns Car2Go. BMW's offering is DriveNow. Volkswagen and Ford are exploring this market, too.
Broadcasters will convene this week in Las Vegas to discuss how to win back the Zero TV Crowd: a rapidly growing demographic of people who don't subscribe to cable or satellite TV services., The Associated Press reports that this group largely opts for Internet streaming of TV shows and movies, either on their computers or through mobile devices such as cell phones or tablets. Subscriptions to online sites like Hulu, Netflix and Amazon are climbing, eliminating the need for traditional viewing habits that require the viewer to follow network schedules and sit through commercials. This is a big concern for broadcasters as their ad revenues fall at alarming rates. Here's the AP:, While show creators and networks make money from this group's viewing habits through deals with online video providers and from advertising on their own websites and apps, broadcasters only get paid when they relay such programming in traditional ways. Unless broadcasters can adapt to modern platforms, their revenue from Zero TV viewers will be zero., The Nielsen Company gets the credit for the Zero TV label, after introducing it in its 2012 Cross-Platform Report. According to the study, the U.S. went from about 2 million Zero TV households in 2007 to more than 5 million now., The Hollywood Reporter wrote in February that Nielsen will begin tracking Internet usage along with traditional ratings measures in order to keep up with the trend. Now broadcasters need a way to follow suit in order to reach the Zero TV crowd online.
Applicants complete forms at a job fair in Newark, N.J. Weak U.S. job growth comes at the same time benefits for the long-term unemployed are shrinking., Applicants complete forms at a job fair in Newark, N.J. Weak U.S. job growth comes at the same time benefits for the long-term unemployed are shrinking., The 11.7 million Americans searching for work got discouraging news Friday morning when the Labor Department said employers created only 88,000 jobs in March. The weak job growth comes at the same time benefits for the long-term unemployed are shrinking., The smaller-than-expected increase in payrolls was a big disappointment, coming after a long stretch of much better results. Over the past year, employment growth has averaged 169,000 jobs a month., April 5, 2013, Hopes for an improved labor market in 2013 soared in February when job creation surged to a revised 268,000 positions, even stronger than the original estimate of 236,000., But the momentum reversed in March, and a lot of people dropped out of the search for work. That allowed the unemployment rate to dip slightly to 7.6 percent, down from 7.7 percent., For the 4.6 million long-term unemployed Americans, the disappointing March report comes just as life gets even tougher. Rules differ from state to state, but in general, government checks for the unemployed are shrinking as extended federal benefits dwindle., 'It's Very Frustrating', Megan DeYoung lost her extended benefits last week. A chef in southeast Wisconsin, DeYoung has been depending on her unemployment insurance checks since losing her job in January 2012., Megan DeYoung lost her extended benefits last week. The Wisconsin chef has been depending on the benefits since losing her job more than a year ago., The economy is still so bad in our area, she said in a phone interview. Despite her constant search for employment, she keeps being told she is overqualified for the restaurant work available. It's very frustrating., Now without extended benefits, the economic impact will be brutal. It makes it hard for us to have a life, she said., Here's what's going on:, The Bureau of Labor Statistics defines the long-term unemployed as workers who have not gotten paychecks for 27 weeks., Traditionally, states manage their own unemployment-insurance programs, setting the rules and carrying the costs for providing 26 weeks of checks, averaging $300 a week., Benefits Grow, Then Get Trimmed, But when the Great Recession started deepening in 2008, lawmakers became alarmed at the pace of job destruction and agreed to provide additional federal funds to help states extend aid to the unemployed., Those benefits were extended again, up to 99 weeks, in 2009 when the unemployment rate peaked at 10 percent. The goal was to help people hang on to their homes and hopes through the worst of the economic downturn., But then in 2012, the job market started improving. In February of last year, Congress reauthorized the extended-benefits program but began trimming it, setting the limit at 73 weeks even in the states with the worst unemployment problems., This year, the cuts will deepen again thanks to the sequestration process, a series of automatic, across-the-board federal spending cuts. Because Congress failed to reach a budget compromise by March 1, the automatic reductions are now kicking in and will cut federal emergency unemployment checks by up to 10.7 percent in this fiscal year, which ends Sept. 30., The roughly 2 million people who get extended benefits will see their incomes shrink by up to $450 between now and the end of September, according to Labor Department estimates., The reductions will vary because each state calculates benefits under its own rules. Some states are making the cuts immediately, and others are holding off for now. The longer a state waits to begin implementing the cuts, the deeper they will be this summer., For Many, A 'Theoretical' Recovery, Advocates for the unemployed say the cuts will have a brutal impact on people who can't find jobs. One such advocacy group, the National Employment Law Project, says the average duration of unemployment is still at 37 weeks, nearly four months longer than during the worst of the recession in the '80s., For millions of America's workers, the economic recovery remains more theoretical than real, says Christine Owens, the group's executive director. Cuts in benefits will not only harm the jobless now, but also weaken the economy over time because the changes will mean lower consumer spending, and higher demand for publicly funded social services for decades to come, she contends., A report last year by the Congressional Budget Office said extending benefits can help the economy because unemployed workers spend every additional dollar they receive., But many conservative economists argue that the labor market has improved enough to create employment opportunities for those willing to make needed changes, such as moving to another city, accepting lower wages or learning new skills., Testifying before Congress, James Sherk, a labor policy analyst with the conservative research group The Heritage Foundation, said people getting unemployment insurance (UI) benefits have less incentive to make the adjustments needed to find jobs., UI payments make being unemployed less costly, causing UI recipients to take longer to find new work, he said.
A crowd of jobseekers attends a health care job fair on Thursday in New York., A crowd of jobseekers attends a health care job fair on Thursday in New York., Almost 5 million Americans are considered long-term unemployed, meaning they have been searching for work for at least six months., This week, their plight is getting a bit tougher as the government cuts their unemployment benefits part of the automatic reductions in federal spending that took effect recently., On a recent day, about 40 people turned out at a Manhattan jobs center run by the New York Labor Department to get advice on looking for work. These are all people who have been out of work for at least 27 weeks., Once you've been out of work as long as these people have, regular unemployment benefits run out. Once they do, the federal government provides extended benefits., Joomati Notsopoulos was laid off a year ago from her job as a sales assistant and has been getting a check for $220 a week. She's been told her next check will be smaller, a casualty of the budget stalemate in Washington., I was kind of depending on my unemployment for extra help, and they're cutting it back, Notsopoulos says., Cuts That Seem Here To Stay, The cuts in the budget for long-term unemployment benefits are not big; about 10 percent. However, Maurice Emsellem of the National Employment Law Project says, the actual reductions in people's checks will be bigger than that, at least over the next few months., Because the sequester is calculated on a fiscal year which started in October, the amount of the cut has to be condensed into a much shorter time period, Emsellem says. So they have until the end of September to implement a year's worth of cuts in benefits., Emsellem isn't optimistic that the money will be restored anytime soon. He says Washington has moved on from the sequester controversy., That's it ... when these benefits are cut, there's no turning back, he says. So if I am on benefits this week and my state starts to implement this sequester, then I lose $30 from my $300 unemployment check., Hardest-Hit Are Hit A Little Harder, That $30 might not seem like a lot, but Joan Cirillo says it is when you've been out of work a long time and are just scraping by. Cirillo is executive director of a program called Operation ABLE of Greater Boston, which tries to help middle-aged and older people find work. She says a lot of the unemployed people she works with are worried about the impact of the cuts., For many of these people, they're just trying to eke out enough to cover mortgage payments, just the essentials, Cirillo says. So if you start cutting these benefits, it really does hit them very hard., Cirillo's organization is feeling the sequester cuts in other ways, too. It runs a training program that provides minimum-wage jobs to the unemployed, and she's been told funds for that program will also be cut.
The company, Redigi, wants to be the used record store of the digital age., We have secondary markets for almost everything. If you no longer want that old record or CD, you can sell it to a thrift store, used record store, or on eBay., But what about songs from your iTunes library you no longer want? Or ebooks you've purchased and don't want to keep? Do you have the right to resell these digital goods?, Today on the show, we've got the story of a company that wants to be the used record store for the digital age. Redigi launched in 2011 and quickly found themselves in court facing allegations of copyright infringement. The case involves a law from 1976, a phonorecord and a judge that quotes Star Trek., For more on the legal case involving ReDigi check out our earlier posts:, For more on the legal issues involved in digital resale, we recommend the blogs of two guests featured in the show:, Music: Adele's Rolling in the Deep &amp; Someone Like You,Peter Frampton's Baby I Love Your Way, and LMFAO's Party Rock. Find us: Twitter/ Facebook/Spotify/ Tumblr. Download the Planet Money iPhone App.
Ohio Gov. John Kasich (left) and Hide Iwata, president and CEO of Honda of America Manufacturing, unveil a new 2013 Honda Accord at the Marysville Auto Plant on Aug. 20 in Marysville, Ohio., Ohio Gov. John Kasich (left) and Hide Iwata, president and CEO of Honda of America Manufacturing, unveil a new 2013 Honda Accord at the Marysville Auto Plant on Aug. 20 in Marysville, Ohio., Honda is moving its North American headquarters from California to Ohio. That's just the latest bit of good news for the Buckeye State and Honda, whose fortunes have been closely tied for decades now., Honda has been an economic heavyweight here since it was lured to central Ohio in the 1970s. The company's footprint is big, and it continues to increase., Honda's sprawling Marysville Auto Plant opened outside Columbus in 1982. Since then, it has grown to nearly 4 million square feet and now sits on a campus of 8,000 acres., More than 4,000 employees build 1,900 vehicles here every day, including Honda Accords and several Acura models, and the company is adding 100,000 square feet to the plant to build a new hybrid., That means more work for nearby engine and transmission plants, and for the more than 150 Ohio companies that sell parts to Honda., A Broad Impact, Company spokesman Ron Lietzke says with Honda's Ohio operations in a continuing growth spurt, it makes sense to move the headquarters here., It will increase the speed of making decisions, it'll increase the speed of introducing new models, and it will improve our communications activities throughout the organization in North America, he says., With more cars being built here and expanding global markets, Honda of America expects to soon become a net exporter of vehicles for the first time, sending cars to Asia and the Middle East. And as Honda goes, so goes much of the rest of central Ohio's economic development., A Boon To Housing, Al Kinzer, who was Honda of America's first employee, drives the company's one millionth U.S.-produced car off the assembly line at Honda's assembly plant in Marysville, Ohio, April 8, 1988., Al Kinzer, who was Honda of America's first employee, drives the company's one millionth U.S.-produced car off the assembly line at Honda's assembly plant in Marysville, Ohio, April 8, 1988., Brothers Adam and Justin McMahon have helped run a family roofing business since high school. When business took a hit during the recession, they decided to try to take advantage of the housing crisis., They started buying up rundown houses in foreclosure, then renovated them and flipped them for a profit. It's been so lucrative that Adam McMahon is considering doing it full time., It's a lot easier. It'd be nice I think there's more money in it, he says, so we started buying houses through the winter, and that gives us our profit for that year., And there's plenty of profit to be had. The latest report shows statewide home sales up 10 percent over last year up 20 percent in the Columbus region. The auto industry is also picking up in Cleveland, Toledo and other parts of the state., Attracting More Employers, The state's unemployment rate is about 1 percentage point below the national average, and incomes in Ohio are rising faster than in all but two other states. Higher land and commodity prices have also helped agriculture, Ohio's largest industry., Michael Brandl, an economist at The Ohio State University, says Ohio is becoming increasingly attractive for both workers and employers., Ohio has a great advantage over some other places where people are thinking of locating, in terms of sound infrastructure, relatively low cost of living, a decent educated workforce, he says. You can see why lots of firms are thinking about and relocating here, as well as starting here., Brandl says those startups should help diversify the economy here even more and ensure that Ohio continues to outperform other states clawing their way back from the recession.
Lots of people are surely looking at today's jobs headlines somewhat puzzled, asking one significant question: How can it be that hiring was much worse than expected in March and the unemployment rate still fell to 7.6 percent?, The answer isn't a happy one. There are a couple of ways the unemployment rate can fall., In the good-for-workers scenario, employers hire more of the unemployed and they sign up new entrants into the workforce like high school and college graduates. That means more people working overall and fewer looking for jobs and unable to find them. The result: a lower unemployment rate, Unfortunately, that's not what happened last month., In March, 496,000 people took themselves out of the labor force altogether, meaning they stopped searching for work., When unemployed people quit looking for jobs it can lower the jobless rate. But for all the wrong reasons. Hiring was weak in March. The 88,000 jobs employers added aren't even enough to keep up with population growth., So that March drop in the unemployment rate to 7.6 percent likely has more to do with frustrated job seekers giving up than employers buying into the economic recovery., See a chart of the labor force participation rate here:, Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, Also:, &mdash; U.S. Job Growth Slows As Jobless Face Benefit Cuts, &mdash; 22 Million Americans Are Unemployed Or Underemployed, &mdash; NYC's Fast-Food Workers Strike, Demand 'Living Wages'
Li-Wen Hung (left) and Whitney Chen were waiting to meet potential employers at a Manhattan job fair earlier this year., Li-Wen Hung (left) and Whitney Chen were waiting to meet potential employers at a Manhattan job fair earlier this year., From 'Morning Edition': NPR's Yuki Noguchi talks with David Greene about the latest employment report, There were just 88,000 jobs added to private and public payrolls in March, the Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates., But the nation's jobless rate still edged down to 7.6 percent from 7.7 percent. That dip wasn't for a good reason, though: Nearly half a million fewer people were participating in the labor force. That smaller pool meant the jobless rate could tick down even as job growth was weak., The news was not in line with expectations. As we reported earlier, economists were expecting to hear that payrolls had grown by 200,000 jobs and that the jobless rate had remained at February's 7.7 percent., But the news was in line with the general trend. While the economy continues to add jobs and has been steadily since mid-2010 that growth remains slow and could weaken some more as the effects of the federal government's sequestration budget cuts take effect., We'll have more from the report and reactions to it as morning continues. Be sure to hit your refresh button to see our latest updates., Update at 1:45 p.m. ET. From Planet Money:, The Jobs Report Puzzle., Update at 10:45 a.m. ET. Economy Is Continuing To Recover, White House Says:, While more work remains to be done, today's employment report provides further evidence that the U.S. economy is continuing to recover from the worst downturn since the Great Depression, writes Alan Krueger, the president's top economic adviser, on the White House blog. He adds that it is critical that we continue the policies that are helping to build an economy that creates jobs and works for the middle class as we dig our way out of the deep hole that was caused by the severe recession that began in December 2007., Krueger also writes that it is important to bear in mind that the March household and payroll surveys are the first monthly surveys to look at employment since the beginning of sequestration. While the recovery was gaining traction before sequestration took effect, these arbitrary and unnecessary cuts to government services will be a headwind in the months to come., Update at 9:45 a.m. ET. Stocks Drop:, Shortly after the opening of trading in New York, the Dow Jones industrial average was down about 140 points (1 percent). Other indices were down 1-1.5 percent., Update at 9:10 a.m. ET. Boehner Blames Obama's Policies:, The president's policies continue to make it harder for Americans to find work, House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, says in a statement sent to reporters by his office. Hundreds of thousands fled the workforce last month and unemployment remains far above what the Obama administration promised when it enacted its 'stimulus' spending plan., The White House typically posts its analysis here. We'll watch for that., Update at 9:05 a.m. ET. Troubling:, The labor market had some reasonable momentum over the past several months, but with just 88,000 job gains in March, once again we see a disappointing seasonal slowdown unfold as we head into spring, writes Kathy Bostjancic, director of macroeconomic analysis at The Conference Board, a business research group., What is even more troubling about the most recent slowdown, she adds, is that it takes place even before the sequester cuts materially hit the economy. This reinforces our view that the estimated 3.5 percent real GDP growth in [the first quarter] is not likely to be sustained. Instead, we see the overall economy, led by the consumer, downshifting significantly in the second quarter, struggling to get close to 1 percent real growth., Update at 9 a.m. ET. Early Analyses:, &mdash; Employers hired fewer workers than forecast in March and a slump in the size of the labor force pushed the jobless rate down to a four-year low, indicating the U.S. job market is struggling to make bigger strides. (Bloomberg News), &mdash; American employers hired at the slowest pace in nine months in March, a sign that Washington's austerity drive could be stealing momentum from the economy. (Reuters), &mdash; There were few encouraging signs from this report. Employers added just 88,000 jobs in March, roughly a third the level of February's number and the lowest figure since June 2012. Manufacturers cut jobs. The jobless rate fell for the wrong reasonspeople dropped out of the labor market. One silver lining: Job growth in January and February was stronger than initially reported. The number of jobs added in those months was revised up by a combined 61,000. (The Wall Street Journal's Real Time Economics blog), Update at 8:55 a.m. ET. Bear In Mind, There Are Really Two Surveys., This issue often comes up when BLS issues its report: The two headline numbers the jobless rate and job growth can seem to signal different things because they are based on separate surveys., BLS derives the unemployment rate from a survey of households. Basically, it asks thousands of Americans a series of questions aimed at determining how many are and aren't working., In the other survey, it contacts public and private employers in an effort to determine how many jobs they have on their payrolls., Update at 8:50 a.m. ET. Some Upward Revisions In Previous Months' Job Growth:, Though the March payroll employment figure was surprisingly low, BLS also on Friday revised up its estimates of growth in January and February., Initially, it reported that 119,000 jobs had been added to payrolls in January. Now, it says there were 148,000 jobs added that month., And it had earlier reported that 236,000 jobs were added to payrolls in February. Now, it says there were 268,000 jobs added that month., It is possible, of course, that a month from now BLS will say there were more than 88,000 jobs added in March., Update at 8:45 a.m. ET. Decline In The Labor Force:, According to BLS, there were 496,000 fewer people counted as being part of the labor force last month. And, the participation rate declined to 63.3 percent from 63.5 percent., So, despite the weak job growth picked up in the agency's survey of employers, the jobless rate was nudged down to its lowest point since December 2008's 7.3 percent.
From 'Morning Edition': Yuki Noguchi talks with David Greene, Update at 8:41 a.m. ET.: Job Growth Slows Sharply, But Unemployment Rate Dips, Although economists had been expecting to hear that the U.S. economy added 200,000 jobs in March, the news is out and the number is far less. Just 88,000 jobs were added to private and public payrolls, the Labor Department reports. The jobless rate still edged down to 7.6 percent but only because nearly half a million fewer people were in the labor force., Our original post continues:, The always anxiously anticipated monthly employment report from the Bureau of Labor Statistics is due at 8:30 a.m. ET and NPR's Yuki Noguchi says economists expect to hear that, as in previous months, there was slow and steady job growth in March., Their forecast:, &mdash; Net growth of 200,000 jobs, down from the estimated 236,000 jobs added to private and public payrolls in February., &mdash; A jobless rate of 7.7 percent, which would be unchanged from February., Think of the tortoise and the hare, Yuki told host David Greene on Morning Edition. When it comes to the economy, the labor market is the tortoise slowly moving along. On average, about 160,000 jobs a month have been added to payrolls in the past three years., Meanwhile, the jobless rate that hit its recent peak of 10 percent in October 2009 has gradually moved down., The hare a part of the economy that's growing quickly would be housing, Yuki added., As for what's ahead on the jobs front, she said most of the possibly negative effects of the federal government's sequester (those automatic spending cuts that are kicking in now) won't be felt for months. For much more on how the sequester is affecting federal agencies, check the conversation David had this morning with six of NPR's correspondents., Bloomberg News, by the way, says economists it has spoken to expect to hear there were 190,000 jobs added to payrolls last month while the jobless rate stayed at 7.7 percent. Reuters' preview is in line with what Yuki's hearing: The economy probably added 200,000 jobs last month, with the jobless rate steady at 7.7 percent., We'll post on the news from the report right after it's released., One other thing to bear in mind: Those figures from February (236,000 jobs added to payrolls and a 7.7 percent unemployment rate) might be revised in Friday's report.
Vice founder Shane Smith attends the premiere screening for the MTV series The Vice Guide To Everything in New York City in December 2010. Vice's new documentary series on HBO launches Friday., Vice founder Shane Smith attends the premiere screening for the MTV series The Vice Guide To Everything in New York City in December 2010. Vice's new documentary series on HBO launches Friday., How did Dennis Rodman end up having dinner with Kim Jong Un in North Korea? It was the idea of Vice Media, which has grown from a counterculture magazine into a full-fledged youth media conglomerate., Friday night, it premieres a documentary series on HBO, a kind of coming-out moment into the mainstream., 'I Wish We Were Weirder', Vice Media's contradictions smack you in the face as soon as you step into its Brooklyn headquarters. You're just as likely to see rapper Snoop Lion walking in as you are journalist Fareed Zakaria., In its glass conference rooms, you might see corporate-looking PowerPoints or staff looking earnestly at pictures of nude, tattooed women. A team from the tech website holds serious meetings about reporting on the Cannabis Cup in Colorado., Everyone [always says], 'Vice is so weird!' and I'm like, look, I wish we were weirder, says Vice's CEO and co-founder, Shane Smith., He's a burly, bearded Canadian who has built Vice into a hipper version of a big media conglomerate. And the company is now succeeding where other media companies have failed., We do music, we do books, we do magazines, we do online, we do mobile, we do television, we do film. We do what everyone else does. We do it weirder, and we do it younger, and we do it in a different way and in a different voice, he says., Young Attraction, In its nearly 20 years, Vice has gone from a small Canadian magazine to figuring out the holy grail of media: how to capture an international audience of aloof 18- to 24-year-olds., In the office's edit rooms, young producers work on everything from a food series, to a film about Somali pirates, to interviews about electronic dance music., Vice Media is based in Brooklyn, N.Y., but it employs 1,000 people in 34 countries., These projects violate all the rules of what's supposed to make money on the Web. Articles can approach New Yorker length. Videos can last an hour, covering topics both serious and salacious. They attract millions of views, as do the ads that accompany each video., Vice's secret sauce has attracted big-name investors like Tom Freston, who ran old-media conglomerate Viacom after helping found MTV in the '80s. He has pushed Vice to expand to reach urban youth around the world., People in Cape Town, people in Moscow, people in Berlin, people in New York, they all sort of share a certain sensibility, he says., Vice now employs 1,000 people across 34 countries, producing dozens of stories and videos a day., Ad Value, This narrow focus on millennials has had big results. Vice's 28 percent profit margins blow away old-line media companies, all by knowing what youth want and what advertisers want., Vice is very, very, very well-known in the marketing circles for being able to reach that demographic and to create programs that are exciting, says Deborah Conrad, chief marketing officer at Intel., Intel has spent millions trying to get some of that Vice cool to rub off on the chipmaker's brand, even if it means being near some edgy content that would scare other companies away., We're a brand that is PG-13. We're not a rated-R brand, she says. So we knew that we were going to be pushing the limits in ourselves in what was going to be comfortable., The two companies came up with an unusual joint venture of sorts, a site about art and design where both companies contribute content. It's the kind of cozy relationship that blurs the line between editorial and advertising., The Fourth Estate, But perhaps what has become the core of the Vice brand is a kind of gritty, on-the-ground reporting from some of the roughest parts of the world., The HBO series has stories from Afghanistan to Kashmir to the Philippines. It's hosted by Smith, the CEO, who also moonlights as a Vice journalist. He says Vice never set out to be a news source, but its audience began considering it one., But when this reporter suggests that Vice's nonfiction has a kind of jaded, world-is-ending feel, Smith says it's moving beyond that. He starts to sound like the editor-in-chief of an august publication., Look, we're going to turn our cameras on something that we think is important. Why? Because we're part of the Fourth Estate and that's our job, he says., That doesn't mean he'll play by the rules of old-school journalism. After all, using Rodman as a pawn to get access to North Korea was his idea., I like Vice more than I trust them, says New York Times media columnist David Carr., Carr wonders if Vice can stay true to its roots and keep growing. He marvels at the scale it has already achieved. His own daughter is now a rising star at Vice's tech site, and a recent video she produced got more than 10 million views on YouTube., I've gone from patronizing her to wishing to emulate her, Carr says., With Vice on track to expand to more countries and launch a news channel for young people, it may have inadvertently built the future of media.
Hewlett-Packard's chairman Raymond Lane will give up his position, The Wall Street Journal, Reuters and Bloomberg are reporting., Ralph Whitworth, a H-P director and principal at Relational Investors LLC, will run the board temporarily until H-P recruits a permanent chairman. Mr. Lane will remain on the board but two other directors, John Hammergren and G. Kennedy Thompson, will resign, the Journal reports., The move is seen as fallout from the company's botched acquisition of Autonomy Corp. Hewlett-Packard acquired the U.K. software maker for nearly $11 billion, but it didn't know that that the company had lied about its revenues to inflate its price. H-P was forced to write down more than $8 billion of that purchase price., Bloomberg explains further:, Lane, Thompson and Hammergren were re-elected in slim majorities in a referendum last month that demonstrated growing dissatisfaction with the company's performance and takeover of Autonomy. An $8.8 billion writedown of the company, disclosed in November, capped a three-year stretch of management upheaval, strategy shifts and slowing growth that hammered shares and made it harder for Chief Executive Officer Meg Whitman to turn around growth at the computer maker., 'It's the right thing, even if a little late,' said Erik Gordon, a professor at the Ross School of Business at the University of Michigan. Ray Lane 'was just barely re-elected to the board and was chairman during HP's most horrible years. His legendary status didn't do anything for HP.', The Wall Street Journal reports that four board members resigned in early 2011., The Palo Alto, Calif., company was hoping for a period of stability under the new lineup. In late February, H-P CEO Meg Whitman said she didn't expect imminent board changes, saying 'we have a very good collection of individuals,' many of whom had served less than two years, the Journal adds.
Demonstrators from the Fast Food Forward rally protest Thursday outside a Wendy's restaurant in New York City., Demonstrators from the Fast Food Forward rally protest Thursday outside a Wendy's restaurant in New York City., Fast-food restaurants were a little bit slower Thursday in New York City. Hundreds of workers staged a one-day strike in what organizers are calling the biggest job action ever in that industry. It's a growing segment of the economy, but workers complain that fast-food jobs don't pay enough to survive in New York City., The current minimum wage in New York is $7.25. That's what many fast-food workers in the city earn, including Joseph Barrera, who works at a KFC restaurant in Brooklyn. He thinks fast-food companies can afford to treat their employees better., We help them earn those billions of dollars that give them the lifestyle that the CEOs get. They earn million-dollar paychecks, so why can't they give us something that we can live on? says Barrera., This is the second time workers at fast-food restaurants around the city have walked off the job in the past six months., Jonathan Westin is a campaign manager for Fast Food Forward, the group that organized both strikes. It's calling for fast food restaurants to pay a so-called living wage of $15 an hour., It's not teenagers working after-school jobs, says Westin. It's adults with families that are trying to take care of their kids and can't put food on the table. They can work here for 10, 15 years and still be making the same wages as when they started., Shenise Hendricks and Lourdy Eferance have both worked at a Wendy's restaurant in Brooklyn for four years. Hendricks is paid $8 an hour and Eferance is paid $7.50 an hour. They say that it's a struggle to live in New York on this salary., And Wendy's isn't an easy place to work, says Hendricks. For example, if she tries to call in sick to work, she gets written up., Wendy's declined to comment for this story. In fact, none of the fast-food companies we called wanted to be interviewed., In a statement, a spokesman for Burger King says the company has provided an entry point into the work-force for millions of Americans, including many who went on to be franchise owners., The National Restaurant Association says the industry provides more than 13 million jobs jobs that could be jeopardized if the minimum wage goes up. In a statement, the association says the industry is one of the best paths to achieving the American Dream., But that dream remains out of reach for people like Gregory Renoso, who makes minimum wage as a deliveryman for Domino's Pizza. People like me, we don't have education to get a better job, says Renoso. We have to do the fast-food industry. But the fast-food industry [doesn't] pay., According to strike organizer Westin, the fast-food industry is one of the few sectors of the economy that are growing quickly. Tens of thousands of fast-food workers are employed in New York alone., Folks can't just move on to other jobs, says Westin. If they could, they probably would have, because the conditions are so bad. The problem is, these are the jobs that are out there. There's really nowhere to go. And while corporations are recovering, the working class is not, he adds., New York's minimum wage is already set to rise to $9 an hour over the next three years. But according to Westin, that change will be too little, too late for many of those who are striking today.
The name may be new, but we've been cutting the porterhouse chop for quite a long time, The name may be new, but we've been cutting the porterhouse chop for quite a long time, Pork's most popular cuts don't have snazzy names. At least, not until now., Coming soon to a grocery store near you are the New York chop, the porterhouse chop and the sirloin chop. Yes, pork is borrowing some of the nomenclature of beef cuts. Why?, Names have the power to transform the 'everyday' into the 'extraordinary,' according to a pork industry website aimed at retailers. Beatles band member Ringo Starr didn't always have that hip 'rock star' moniker; his real name [Richard Starkey] was rather run-of-the-mill, the site says., So there's nothing run-of-the-mill about the pork chop's new name: porterhouse chop. It's evocative of a fancy steakhouse. And pork producers and retailers hope the changes will help drive up sales., Our producers have had a challenging year. The price of corn [feed] has been up because of the drought, explains Ceci Snyder, vice president of marketing for the National Pork Board. But Snyder says these changes were in the works long before last year's drought struck., In 2011, the pork industry conducted some focus group research and found out that consumers were confused by meat labels and didn't necessarily know how to prepare different cuts of meat. Our research was a big wake-up call, says Snyder., For pork, she says, there's a misunderstanding that all pork chops are the same. So, the plan is to highlight four or five chops that are all a little different., Consumers tend to know cuts of beef from restaurant menus. So Snyder says the idea is to transfer that knowledge to pork: If you like a rib-eye in beef, here's the equivalent in pork., New name, same taste, New name, same taste, The National Cattlemen's Beef Association is cooperating on the new initiative. The changes are being made as part of an updated, voluntary, industry-wide effort known as the Uniform Retail Meat Identity Standards program. It was originally established in 1973 to set standards for fresh meat cuts., In addition, the industry is introducing new labels aimed at linking specific cuts of meat to proper or recommended cooking methods. And this part of the initiative will be really helpful to consumers, says chef Bruce Mattel, who oversees the meat curriculum at the Culinary Institute of America in Hyde Park, N.Y., What they're doing is really educational for the consumer, Mattel tells The Salt. Consumers are often intimidated at the meat counter because they don't know what cooking technique is best., Once retailers start using the suggested new labeling, Mattel says, it will be easier to figure out which cuts are best for the grill and which may be better off being stewed., As a rule of thumb, if the label says it's good for stewing, it generally means that the meat is not naturally tender and requires a longer cooking technique, says Mattel such as in a slow cooker or in a soup, where the meat is fully submerged in liquid., In contrast, if a cut is recommended for grilling such as the porterhouse chop people can be confident it's usually a shorter-term cooking method, and that the meat is naturally tender, he says. So you can also pan-saute or broil it., The changes should be introduced at grocery stores around the country this summer, just in time for grilling season.
Former Enron Chief Executive Jeffrey Skilling outside of the Bob Casey United States Court House in Houston in 2006., Jeffrey Skilling, the former Enron executive serving a 24-year prison sentence for his role in the energy company's collapse, may receive a shorter prison term., According to Reuters, the United States Department of Justice notified victims of Enron's fraud that they are currently in negotiation with Skilling., Reuters adds:, It is unclear how much Skilling's sentence could be reduced, and a Justice Department official said no agreement has been reached. CNBC, the television business channel, said prosecutors and Skilling's lawyers have been negotiating a shorter term., Skilling has maintained his innocence, and according to court filings has been pursuing a new trial., He is scheduled to leave prison around February 2028, assuming good behavior, according to federal prison records., Skilling has served 6-1/4 years of his sentence. If you remember, Skilling was convicted of 19 counts of conspiracy in 2006. He became the poster child of Enron's illegal business deals and creative accounting tricks., The New York Times reports Skilling has appealed his conviction and with some success. The paper reports:, Mr. Skilling's appeal gained traction with his argument that the government had relied on a dubious legal theory that Mr. Skilling deprived others of his honest service. In 2010, the Supreme Court called the use of the awkwardly written honest services law unconstitutionally vague and said his conviction was flawed., But a federal appeals court subsequently ruled that the conviction was not tainted by the use of the theory and said there was overwhelming evidence that Mr. Skilling had conspired to commit fraud. Last year, the Supreme Court declined to hear Mr. Skilling's appeal of the appeals court ruling., The AP reports that in 2009, the appeals court ruled Skilling had to be resentenced because the judge improperly applied the sentencing guidelines., Update at 6:39 p.m. Justice's Goal Is Appropriate Punishment: , A Justice Department official cited the 2009 appeals court order, but said the Department's goal is, and has always been, to ensure that Mr. Skilling be appropriately punished for his crimes, and that victims finally receive the restitution they deserve.
Lululemon clothes at a store in Pasadena, Calif., Lululemon clothes at a store in Pasadena, Calif., Two weeks after being embarrassed by the news that some of its yoga pants were way too sheer, there's word from Lululemon that chief product officer Sheree Waterson will be leaving the company April 15., As The Wall Street Journal and other news outlets report, Waterson's departure wasn't tied directly to the problem with black luon women's bottoms. The company said it's part of a reorganization of our product organization. Lululemon CEO Christine Day said in a statement, We appreciate the many contributions that Sheree made during her time with Lululemon, particularly in the area of design., As for the problem with the pants, Lululemon says:, &mdash; After an evaluation of our previously disclosed black luon production issues we concluded that the current specification and testing protocols for the signature fabric luon that were developed in 2006 have not materially changed., &mdash; The production of luon is a complex process with a number of different inputs. Fabric is the key factor and while the fabric involved may have met testing standards, it was on the low end of lululemon's tolerance scale and we have found that our testing protocols were incomplete for some of the variables in fabric characteristics., &mdash; When combined with subtle style changes in pattern and differences, the resulting end product had an unacceptable level of sheerness., The company also said Wednesday that it still believes its first-quarter sales took a hit because of the problem, and subsequent recall of the pants and refunds paid to customers. The impact: first-quarter sales of $333 million to $343 million, not the $350 million to $355 million that had been expected making for a real blow to the bottom line.
Will there be more signs like this? An automotive service shop in El Cerrito, Calif., was looking for workers last month., Will there be more signs like this? An automotive service shop in El Cerrito, Calif., was looking for workers last month., There were 385,000 first-time claims for unemployment insurance last week, up by 28,000 from the week before, the Employment and Training Administration says., The news follows Wednesday's report of slower-than-expected job growth in the private sector: The ADP National Employment Report estimated that businesses added just 158,000 jobs last month., And the word that jobless claims have touched a four-month high comes just before Friday's anxiously anticipated report from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. It will release data on the March unemployment rate and job growth in both the public and private sectors., According to Reuters, economists expect to hear that there were a relatively modest 200,000 jobs added to those payrolls last month and that the unemployment rate remained at 7.7 percent., All in all, Reuters adds, the latest jobs data suggest that the labor market recovery lost some steam in March.
For more, watch our video: Secrets From A Potato Chip Factory., Americans spend less on groceries than they did a few decades ago. That's partly because of new machines and technology that have made it much cheaper to produce food., We went to the Herr's potato chip factory in Nottingham, Pa., to see some of this food-making technology in action. When Herr's first opened up in 1946, founder Jim Herr and his family made chips by hand. Here are three ways the process has changed over the years., 1. Unloading Potatoes, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, It used to take hours to unload a truck full of potatoes by hand. Ed Herr Jim's son and the current president of the company remembers dragging hundred-pound sacks into the factory. Today, the truck drives a semi-trailer full of potatoes onto a lift. The lift goes up., Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, And 50,000 pounds of potatoes come rolling out. The whole thing takes just 20 minutes., 2. Getting Rid Of Bad Chips, Herr's has been removing potato chips with brown or green spots for decades. Workers used to do it by hand. But now, they have the OptoSort. The OptoSort takes photos of the freshly fried chips, identifies the off-color ones, and then puffs of air shoot them off the line., Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, The red arrow shows the rejects being blown off the line:, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, Good chips are flying by at the top of the frame; the rejects are getting blown onto the conveyor belt at the bottom of the frame. Here's a close-up of the action:, 3. Packaging, Mim Herr (right), with Mary Wowrer, packing chips by hand., The company used to pack chips into bags by hand. The picture below shows Mim Herr, Jim's wife and Ed's mom, packing chips. Ed says she would maybe make three bags a minute., Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, Today, a machine weighs and sorts chips into foil bags at a rate of 100 bags a minute., One final note: Ed Herr says workers whose jobs were replaced by machines (e.g., getting rid of green chips, hauling sacks of potatoes) were reassigned to other jobs, like driving trucks full of chips to stores.
Lawyer Meredith Watts (left) visits client/patient Shirley Kimbrough at her apartment in north Akron, Ohio. Kimbrough is being helped by a program under which lawyers partner up with health providers to supply patients with legal advice., Lawyer Meredith Watts (left) visits client/patient Shirley Kimbrough at her apartment in north Akron, Ohio. Kimbrough is being helped by a program under which lawyers partner up with health providers to supply patients with legal advice., Two professions that have traditionally had a rocky relationship doctors and lawyers are finding some common ground in clinics and hospitals across the country., In Akron, Ohio, for instance, doctors are studying how adding a lawyer to the health care team can help improve a patient's health., As a TV drones in the background, about a dozen women and children wait for their names to be called at the Summa women's clinic in Akron., In the clinic's conference room, Meredith Watts is awaiting her next case. She's not a doctor or a nurse. She's a lawyer who specializes in housing and consumer work., Legal Advice To Help Health Patients, Watts works for Community Legal Aid, a nonprofit that gives free legal help to low-income people in eight Ohio counties. Her firm is housed in a downtown office tower. But Watts prefers working out of the clinic., So if somebody comes in to the clinic and they get sent to me and it's a housing problem and I'm here, I can give them advice directly on site, she says., Watts' role on the team is to help solve issues that might affect a patient's health but are outside a doctor's control., Let's say you're under threat of eviction because of something that happened, she says. That's going to cause a significant amount of anxiety, potentially, and then you're suffering from these anxiety problems that wouldn't have happened if we had been able to intervene and perhaps help with the eviction problem, she says., A Type Of Preventative Law, And, as a lawyer, Watts makes house calls. One of her clients, Shirley Kimbrough, lives in a subsidized housing unit in a north Akron neighborhood., The clinic referred Kimbrough to Watts, who last year helped her move into this handicapped-accessible apartment to care for her disabled granddaughter., If I hadn't had her to help me I would have lost my granddaughter because I had already lost my daughter, and I don't think I could have stood that, Kimbrough says., Attorney Marie Curry runs Akron's medical-legal partnership., It's exciting to be able to do what we think of as preventative law, rather than always being crisis intervention because you can help something not happen, before it becomes a crisis, Curry says., 'It Doesn't Make Any Sense', But not all lawyers are quick to embrace a cozy new relationship with their old adversaries., I don't understand how a medical clinic needs an attorney to be a part of its team. It doesn't any make sense to me, says Allen Schulman, a malpractice attorney in nearby Canton who takes a more traditional view of the two professions., I think there has historically been an animosity between lawyers and doctors. I think we share some of the blame, and I think the medical profession shares some of the blame, he says., But back at the Akron women's clinic, researcher Michele McCarroll says doctors here like having a lawyer down the hall from the examination room., A 'One-Stop Shop', We are trying to meet the needs of the patients right here on site in kind of a one-stop shop where we know things ... such as social issues, can make a difference in health issues, she says., McCarroll and Akron's Community Legal Aid lawyers have enrolled 100 women in the first randomized study to determine whether having a lawyer on-site really does improve health outcomes., They're measuring conditions like blood pressure, stress and other health factors in two groups of women who had legal issues. One group was introduced to a clinic lawyer; the other group was given a number for the legal help line., They plan to present their results next week at the national Medical-Legal Partnership Summit in Washington.
Manufacturing in the U.S. still uses the most energy. But its share has been decreasing. That's partly because we've moved from energy-intensive manufacturing to a more service-based economy. And also partly because of a slowing population growth and improving energy efficiency., Source: Energy Information Administration, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, And while homes have become more energy efficient, they're on average about 30 percent larger. Which means overall, the energy use in homes is about the same. (Economists call this the rebound effect some of the energy savings from more efficiency gets wiped out by more use.), The rebound effect is also apparent in the transportation sector. Since 1961, the number of people driving cars and trucks has increased. People are also driving more. Regulations requiring cars and trucks to become more energy efficient are trying to curb fuel use. The U.S. Energy Information Administration says these regulations (and the high the price for gas and lower incomes due to the recession) may have slowed the rise in demand for fuel for transportation. Still, the growth continues., Here's where that energy came from:, Source: Energy Information Administration, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, In 1961, the largest portion of our energy (including the energy that used to generate electricity) came from crude oil. That's still true today. But the technological growth of renewable energy and the rise of electricity from nuclear power, means that crude oil's dominance is shrinking.
The Peter Cooper Village and Stuyvesant Town apartment complex is seen from Waterside Plaza in 2006, the same year it was sold in a record-breaking real estate deal., The Peter Cooper Village and Stuyvesant Town apartment complex is seen from Waterside Plaza in 2006, the same year it was sold in a record-breaking real estate deal., The middle-income housing projects Stuyvesant Town and Peter Cooper Village sit on an 80-acre patch of Lower Manhattan. In 2006, they came to epitomize the lunatic excess of the housing boom when their 11,232 apartments sold for $5.4 billion. They were bought at a competitive auction by Tishman Speyer Properties and BlackRock Realty., Charles Bagli covered the purchase for The New York Times. In his new book, Other People's Money, he tells the story of how the biggest ever real estate deal came together and then spectacularly came apart. Standing in the park at the center of Stuyvesant Town, Bagli tells NPR's Robert Siegel that these housing projects provided a place where people of moderate means could set down roots., There's first-, second- and third-generation families living here, he says, and it was sort of a quiet oasis and, most importantly, an affordable oasis in an increasingly expensive Manhattan., Stuyvesant Town is littered with basketball courts, playgrounds and jungle gyms., Stuyvesant Town is littered with basketball courts, playgrounds and jungle gyms., Both Stuyvesant Town and Peter Cooper Village were built in the 1940s by MetLife, with help from the city. Sixty years later, many of the residents lived in rent-stabilized apartments. But somehow, Tishman Speyer and BlackRock thought they'd be able to make good money off the deal., Rents in New York were rising at a pretty rapid clip, Bagli says. And the rent laws had actually been watered down over the prior decade. So a lot of developers thought that they could buy what they might call 'meat and potatoes' buildings and dislodge one set of tenants, or residents, for another set that was one or two rungs up the ladder. And this way they could make that profit, a bigger profit, on their complex., A Luxury Housing Project?, Kirstin Aadahl of the Stuyvesant Town-Peter Cooper Village Tenants Association stands in a three bedroom, 1,161-square-foot apartment. Siegel grew up in a unit just like this. His family moved to Stuyvesant Town when the complex opened in 1948, and his parents moved out about 20 years later, when the monthly rent was pushing north of $200. Today, a new tenant, who doesn't fall under the rent laws, could expect to pay at least $5,242 a month for such a unit., At the core of the 2006 real estate deal was whether this refuge for middle-income New Yorkers could really be redefined as luxury housing. Siegel says that while he has many pleasant memories of his childhood in Stuyvesant Town, one thing it was not is luxurious. The units now have dishwashers and air conditioning, a feature Siegel says wasn't allowed when he was growing up. Back then, they also didn't allow cats and dogs (they do now) and, Bagli points out, 10 years ago residents weren't allowed on the grassy area in the middle of the complex., Inside the Housing Crisis and the Demise of the Greatest Real Estate Deal Ever Made, by Charles V. Bagli, Hardcover, 387 pages | purchase, More on this book:, There was post and chain all around every single stretch of grass here, Bagli recalls, and the guards would chase you away if you tried to set foot on a blade of grass., The Housing Crisis, In A Nutshell, According to Bagli, Tishman Speyer and BlackRock's purchase was doomed from Day 1., There was an enormous amount of debt and the income from the property only covered 40 percent of the debt service, he says. So that's, you know, you buy a house ... and Day 1 you don't have enough money to pay the mortgage. In fact, you've got less than half the money to pay the mortgage. Now, you and I can't get away with that. But the big guys can the guys who are playing with other people's money., And New York's real estate juggernauts were making what turned out to be a colossal mistake., These firms did very well with office buildings, Bagli explains. One of their mistakes the hubris here was that they assumed that real estate is all the same. But not only is residential different, but there's this peculiar subspecies known as rent-regulated housing, and if you don't understand it its customs, its politics it'll kill you., The whole idea behind the deal was that Tishman Speyer and BlackRock could get tenants in rent-regulated units out, and tenants who were willing to pay market rents in. But the tenants association went to court and blocked them. It turns out, you can't take advantage of public tax breaks which they and MetLife had been doing and raise rents the way they planned. There was no way those thousands of monthly rent checks could match the owners' debts. So they just walked away. It was easy to do because it wasn't their money on the line., They pretty much went through it unscathed, Bagli says, but CalPERS [the California Public Employees' Retirement System], the largest pension fund in the country, lost $500 million. Poof gone. ... Another pension fund down in Florida lost $250 million. The government of Singapore, well, they lost the most over $600 million. It all just went poof., This was the housing crisis writ large: Tishman Speyer and BlackRock lost a lot of people a couple of billion dollars, walked away from it unscathed and went into the next deal without anyone calling them out on their colossal mistake., People say, 'Oh, New York is the most unforgiving market in the world,' Bagli says. But it seems very forgiving., Read an excerpt of Other People's Money
There's been increasing support for the number of H-1B visas, for highly skilled workers. Large tech companies are leading the push for the increase, but many of the visas go to workers at large consulting firms., There's been increasing support for the number of H-1B visas, for highly skilled workers. Large tech companies are leading the push for the increase, but many of the visas go to workers at large consulting firms., The tech industry wants more skilled workers from overseas. Companies are lobbying hard for Congress to raise the limit on H-1B visas visas for people with specialized skills researchers, for instance, or software engineers., Brad Smith, Microsoft's general counsel, recently told NPR that more H-1B visas can't help but be good for the country., We need to continue to attract some of the best and brightest people in the world to come and join us in world-leading [research and development] efforts, Smith said., But that best-and-brightest argument doesn't quite match up with reality especially when you look at which companies are using the most H-1Bs., Who Is Using the Visas?, If you scroll through the government's visa data, you notice something surprising. The biggest employer of foreign tech workers is not Microsoft not by a long shot. Nor is it Google, Facebook or any other name-brand tech company. The biggest users of H-1Bs are consulting companies, or as Ron Hira calls them, offshore-outsourcing firms., The top 10 recipients in [the] last fiscal year were all offshore-outsourcers. And they got 40,000 of the 85,000 visas which is astonishing, he says., Hira's a professor of public policy at the Rochester Institute of Technology. He's also the son of Indian immigrants and has a personal interest in questions of labor flow across borders., For the past decade, he's been studying how consulting firms use temporary work visas to help American companies cut costs. He says they use the visas to supply cheaper workers here, but also to smooth the transfer of American jobs to information-technology centers overseas., What these firms have done is exploit the loopholes in the H-1B program to bring in on-site workers to learn the jobs [of] the Americans to then ship it back offshore, he says. And also to bring in on-site workers who are cheaper on the H-1B and undercut American workers right here., The biggest user of H-1B last year was Cognizant, a firm based in New Jersey. The company got 9,000 new visas. Following close behind were Infosys, Wipro and Tata all Indian firms. They're not household names, but they loom large in tech places like the Seattle suburbs., Cutting Costs, Rennie Sawade, a software designer with 30 years of experience, grew up in Michigan watching the decline of the auto industry. And so, he went into computers in search of a more secure career. But that's not how it turned out., Basically, what I see is, it's happening all over again, Sawade says., Programmers like him tend to be freelancers, or contract workers, and the big consulting firms are the competition. Sawade remembers when he almost landed a plum job at Microsoft., I remember having phone interviews and talking with the manager, having him sound really excited about my experience and he was going to bring me in to meet the team, Sawade recalls., And then: nothing. He called his own placement agency to find out what happened., And that's when they told me, 'Oh, they hired somebody from Tata Consultancy.' And they actually told me on the phone, the woman I was talking to said her jaw just dropped when they found out how little Microsoft was paying this person from Tata Consultancy to do this job, he says., Not Being Replaced, 'Not Right Away', Sawade is active in the labor organization WashTech, so he gets complaints from IT workers around the country. The H-1B consultancies are especially big in banking, insurance and pretty much any industry that runs on big computer systems maintained by aging, increasingly expensive American tech workers., He laughs at the notion that a cost-cutting insurance company somewhere is in dire need of hotshot foreign programmers with specialized skills. Because the businesses require current employees to train the new hires from India, he says., And maybe the people from India aren't necessarily there to replace them at least not right away. They're just learning the job, Sawade says., Learning the job, he says, so the consulting firm can eventually provide the same service from somewhere cheaper., What H-1B Employers Say, NPR repeatedly tried to interview the biggest H-1B users, but none agreed to talk. We were able to reach Dean Garfield, head of the Information Technology Industry Council, which counts Cognizant among its members., Some of the companies are companies yes that are providing services that bring greater efficiencies to businesses. But what's wrong with that? Garfield says., He rejects the notion that Cognizant is using foreign tech workers to undercut Americans. He points out that H-1B workers are supposed to be paid prevailing wages., In practice, though, that rule is rarely enforced. In a 2011 report, the U.S. Government Accountability Office said worker protections are weakened by several factors and that oversight is cursory., Garfield acknowledges the system isn't perfect., The main, legitimate criticism right now which is one we would level as well is that the accountability mechanisms are not fully integrated and not seamless. It's more a 'check the box,' he says., But he also takes exception to criticism that lumps the consulting firms together something he calls offensive., There is a lot of anti-India sentiment in many of the criticisms and articles around this that I think are completely unfounded and unnecessary, Garfield says., 'Domestic Outsourcing', But it's not offensive to Neeraj Gupta, who is a U.S. citizen. He came here on a student visa for his master's degree in electrical engineering., Gupta spent part of his career working for the Indian consulting firm Patni (now called iGate), and he says it was obvious they were using H-1B workers to replace Americans., It happened on almost every one of his projects, he says. On some of those projects even the clients had misgivings., I had people come to me and tell me that the No. 1 issue that they faced even as they were offering this work was the fact that they had longstanding employees, and the implications of them losing their jobs, Gupta says., He now runs what he calls a domestic outsourcing company also a consultancy, but his workers are American., So he does have an incentive to criticize the H-1B system. At the same time, he doesn't want to eliminate it. He believes U.S. tech companies are in dire need of highly skilled foreign workers. The problem, he says, is that so many of the visas are gobbled up for middle-of-the-road tech jobs already being done by Americans.
The scene at a job fair in Manhattan on March 6., The scene at a job fair in Manhattan on March 6., There were 158,000 more jobs on private employers' payrolls in March than in February, the latest ADP National Employment Report estimates., The gain was less than economists expected, Reuters reports. They thought ADP would say there had been a 200,000-jobs increase., Along with the data from last month, ADP also revised its figures for February and January. There was good and bad news in those changes:, &mdash; February's [previously reported] gain of 198,000 jobs was revised up by 39,000 to 237,000., &mdash; January's [previously reported] 215,000 gain was revised down by 38,000 to 177,000., The privately produced ADP report comes each month just before the widely watched unemployment and employment data released by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. That agency's March report is due on Friday at 8:30 a.m. ET., A month ago, BLS said that public and private payrolls grew by 236,000 jobs in Febuary while the nation's unemployment rate dipped by two-tenths of a point, to 7.7 percent., Reuters says economists expect BLS will say there were 200,000 jobs added in March and that the jobless rate stayed at 7.7 percent.
The demand from American companies for high-skilled immigrants seems to be up this year. And that could mean something is about to change for the overall economy., There is a cap on the number of visas the government gives out for these kind of workers every year. Lately, that cap has been 85,000. Demand always outstrips supply, but for the past couple of years, it has taken at least a few months to hit the quota. But this year, the H-1B visas might be gone by the end of the week., Kramer Levin, just one big immigration firm in New York City, is having a record year with these visa applications. It represents companies that want to hire these workers. The firm is processing hundreds of requests from clients for the likes of financial analysts, software engineers, actuaries and information technology (IT) professionals., When I visited last Friday afternoon, I saw buckets of FedEx envelopes lined up in the mailroom, ready to go. The lawyers, who'd been working late nights for months, were getting ready to go to happy hour now that everything was filed. The window opened April 1. They were done., So what does the scene at this law firm tell us about the economy? After all, 85,000 jobs is not a lot. The U.S. economy adds an average of 100,000 jobs every month., The surge in demand does tell us things are getting back to normal. This was the typical scene a big push like this, at these kinds of immigration firms before the recession, back when it used to take mere days or weeks to fill the quota., Pia Orrenius, an economist at the Dallas Federal Reserve, says these workers are the ones companies hire to upgrade Web platforms, or expand their mobile analytics. They're the ones they hire when it looks like business is about to turn around., The demand for these workers comes from the demand for the services these firms produce, Orrenius says. Once firms decide that the economy has turned around, that's when they decide to upgrade their systems., And that could mean lots more hiring for all kinds of workers later this year.
Erica Freeman of Choice Organics weighs medical marijuana for a customer., An obscure tax code provision crafted for drug dealers is giving state-licensed medical marijuana dispensaries a headache., In Colorado, federal income tax rates for dispensaries can soar as high as 70 percent because of a tax code section that does not allow businesses to claim certain deductions., The section is known as 280E, and it was originally written for illegal drug traffickers. But today it's a thorn in the side of licensed dispensary owners like Erica Freeman., Freeman is co-owner of Choice Organics in Fort Collins, Colo. Two tax court decisions over the past six years have sent confusing messages about which deductions the industry can make. In 2012, Freeman wrote off the costs associated with growing pot, but she didn't deduct anything related to the sale of medical marijuana like advertising costs., We all feel like we are legitimate businesses. We have licenses ... but yet I'm still unable to write these things off and I'm still treated as an illegal business, Freeman says., Freeman says existing tax code could make Colorado's expansion to recreational marijuana use very tricky for business owners. The uncertain tax climate is the direct product of state and federal law clashing on medical marijuana policy in the 18 states where it's legal. The end result right now, according to Colorado accountant Jim Marty, is income taxes rates that are much higher compared with those paid by other small businesses., If they were in a normal business, their top bracket would be about 45 percent. But if you have to pay tax on your gross profit and not your net income, the calculations I've done puts the federal and state income tax at about 70 percent, Marty says., The financial picture translates into some soul searching for dispensaries, Marty says., He's an accountant for 75 dispensaries in the state. Some take a conservative approach to deductions. Others are claiming all deductions as a type of protest. In true IRS fashion, Marty explains there's a form for that., And if they chose to go down that road, we do include that form with the tax return and tell the IRS that we agree to disagree with them, Marty says., Doing that, he says, means basically expecting an IRS audit., Marty is actively working on six audits with the Internal Revenue Service. He expects at least one of his clients to challenge the IRS deduction policy in Colorado court this year. For its part, the IRS has been relatively quiet on the topic while it continues to apply the 280E tax rule to dispensaries. The agency declined interview requests for this story. The silence has been frustrating to San Francisco attorney Henry Wykowski, an expert on the topic., This is inherently unfair, Wykowski says., Wykowski has represented sellers in the two existing court cases that provide the only guideposts on how the law applies to dispensaries. And the results have been mixed. He says he's repeatedly sought more specific guidelines from the IRS but has come up short., It punishes the dispensary owners who are trying to comply with the law and rewards those that ignore their obligation to file tax returns, he says., In the meantime, Colorado dispensary owner Freeman says she'll continue to meet all her tax obligations. But she says a fix is desperately needed., Those people that 280E was written for didn't have a license hanging on their wall from the state of Colorado that says you are legal to do business, Freeman says., Medical or recreational marijuana use is now legal in one-third of all states. The legal limbo can be resolved by either Congress or the courts. Until then, dispensary owners will have one more reason to dread income tax day.
Fannie Mae's headquarters in Washington, DC., Fannie Mae's headquarters in Washington, DC., The government-controlled mortgage giant Fannie Mae, which needed a $116 billion federal bailout after the housing bubble burst in 2007, said Tuesday that it earned a record $7.6 billion in fourth-quarter 2012 and $17.2 billion for the year., That allowed it to pay $11.6 billion in dividends to the U.S. Treasury Department last year, Fannie Mae says. Since 2008, it has paid taxpayers $35.6 billion in dividends. Looking ahead, we expect our earnings to remain strong over the next few years, Timothy Mayopoulos, president and chief executive officer, said in a statement., Bloomberg News writes that:, Washington-based Fannie Mae and McLean, Virginia-based Freddie Mac buy mortgages from lenders and package them into securities on which they guarantee payments of principal and interest. The two companies have drawn $187.5 billion from Treasury and have sent back more than $60 billion in the form of dividends, which count as a return on the government's investment and not as a repayment., Under the terms of an agreement with Treasury that went into effect this year, the enterprises will be allowed to retain only $3 billion in net worth. Any profits beyond that amount will go to taxpayers., As The Wall Street Journal notes in a paywall-protected report, Fannie Mae has been benefiting from the housing market's turnaround and sustained declines in the number of soured home loans. ... Fannie is [also] losing less money on homes it sells through foreclosure as prices in many markets rise.
The importance of making a smart decision on how and when benefits are claimed can't be underestimated, says Mary Beth Franklin of Investment News., When it comes to claiming Social Security benefits, there is no magic age. Today's boomers can begin collecting full benefits at 66, tap in early for a modified benefit at 62 or delay receiving benefits until 70., But the importance of making a smart decision on how and when benefits are claimed can't be underestimated, says Mary Beth Franklin of Investment News., For the majority of American retirees, Social Security is the only form of guaranteed cost of living-adjusted income they will ever see, and for many retirees, it is their only source of income, Franklin tells Morning Edition's David Greene., It may be tempting to start collecting Social Security benefits at 62, but Franklin suggests getting the biggest benefit that you're entitled to. And I'll tell you, when you're 85, you're going to be really glad you've got a big benefit, she says., Begin At 62 Or 66?, Let's say you're entitled to $1,000 a month at your normal retirement age of 66. If you take it at 62, you're going to take a 25 percent haircut the rest of your life. So you will get smaller checks for a longer period of time., If you have health issues and are unlikely to live to your normal life expectancy which for most Americans is about 78 or 80 go ahead, take it early. But the one caveat is if you plan to keep working while you claim Social Security benefits, you're going to end up losing some of those benefits, basically giving them back. So my No. 1 rule is if you plan to keep working, don't take Social Security benefits before your normal age of 66. Once you get to 66, this thing called the earnings cap that can claw back some benefits goes away., Married Couples: Lock In The Largest Benefit, There are enormous opportunities for married couples. What most married couples should think about when they make a decision: It's not two individual decisions. You're an economic unit. What most married couples want to do is lock in the largest possible survivor benefit, because when one spouse dies the largest benefit will remain. So you want the highest earner, which, frankly, is still usually the husband, to delay taking benefits as long as possible because not only will he get a bigger benefit during his lifetime, but if he dies first, the wife will then get 100 percent of what he got during his lifetime. Her smaller benefit would go away., Divorce: Claiming Benefits On Your Ex, The least understood fact about Social Security is that many divorced spouses are entitled to benefits on their ex. The basic rules are the marriage must have lasted for at least 10 years, and you must be currently unmarried. Under those circumstances you can claim benefits on your ex as long as he or she is at least 62 years old. They don't even have to be claiming their benefits, as long as they're eligible to claim benefits ... and even if you were married to other people in between.
Everything from telephone wire to plumbing is a target for copper thieves, and lawmakers in nearly half the states are considering legislation aimed at making it harder to sell the stolen metal., The price of copper remains at near historic highs, and that means so, too, does the amount of copper getting stolen., Everything from telephone wire to plumbing is a target, and lawmakers in nearly half the states are considering legislation aimed at making it harder for thieves to sell the stolen metal., James City County in southeastern Virginia has seen a spate of recent copper thefts. Maj. Steve Rubino with the county police department says there have been six major incidents since January., With thousands of dollars at stake, Rubino says, thieves are taking risks. One of the targets, for example, was a power substation at the end of a remote road., Even though it says 'High voltage, may cause injury or death,' obviously they were not concerned with that, Rubino says., Police say the thieves who robbed this substation may be responsible for another theft of copper out of air-conditioning units and heat pumps at an office park 10 miles away and a theft across town at a used car lot. We've had somebody cut a hole in that fence and then go in and remove radiators from some cars, and catalytic converters, Rubino says., The thefts in James City County range from $500 to $8,000 since the beginning of this year., The Trouble With Tracking, For police, there's another challenge. Once the copper is stolen, it's nearly impossible to track it down., They're stealing it to bring it someplace where it's melted down. It's not like stealing a TV where there's a serial number, or a car where there's a VIN number and can easily be traced, Rubino says., It's like this all over the country, and states are responding. Since January, 49 bills have been introduced in 23 states. Many of them involve just that problem tracking the sale of used copper., In Ohio, one bill would prohibit scrap dealers from buying copper plumbing pipe from anyone other than a plumber. Many of the bills would make scrap dealers take pictures of copper items and document them. Others would impose a waiting period before dealers could sell the copper., Just last month, Virginia passed a law that requires scrap dealers to keep photos of metal they purchase on hand for at least a month., Even Congress has stepped in. Sen. Amy Klobuchar, a Minnesota Democrat, is proposing new legislation that would make stealing copper in some cases a federal crime and would increase regulations on buying and selling it., I don't think people realize what a problem this crime is. It has jumped more than 80 percent in recent years, Klobuchar says., We have places in Minnesota that have been broken into multiple times, many of them in rural areas, she says. Someone stole 200 Bronze Stars [grave markers] off of veterans' graves., Police, she says, need more help. Our laws have to be as sophisticated as the crooks that are breaking them, she says., At The Scrap Yard, At Old Dominion Metals about 30 miles away from James City County, owners John Hund and his father, Tim, bought about 25 million pounds of scrap metal last year., The Hunds say they know that some of the copper they buy may be stolen in fact, sometimes they've called the police on suspicious customers., As for the proposed waiting period, Hund calls it absolutely ridiculous., He waves at huge mounds of aluminum cans, copper, old air conditioners and car parts in his scrap metal yard., What you're seeing here ... that's just stuff that has come in today, so a) you would not have the room to store everything, and b) you'd have to have some pretty deep pockets to shell out $250,000 worth of metal and not get paid for it that long, he says., There's no question that the proposed regulations will add new burdens and costs for recyclers like the Hunds. But lawmakers and police say they need to balance other concerns like the damage copper theft is causing to infrastructure and the hundreds of millions of dollars these crimes are costing victims. They say the single best place to catch thieves is at the scrap yard.
People line up to enter a newly-opened Apple Store in Wangfujing shopping district in Beijing., People line up to enter a newly-opened Apple Store in Wangfujing shopping district in Beijing., In an unusual move on Monday, Apple CEO Tim Cook apologized to Chinese customers over the company's warranty policy and vowed to improve customer service in the country., As the New York Times reports, Apple's apology was the latest in a series of odd spectacles unfolding in China in regard to its warranty policies in the nation, where many of its products are manufactured., Every year on International Consumers' Day, China's biggest state-run television network broadcasts an investigative report on how companies operating in China cheat or mistreat consumers. This year, on March 15, one of the targets was Apple., China Central Television criticized the American company's after-sales iPhone customer service in China because it only gives a one-year warranty while in China the law is two years. It also said that phone owners have to pay about $90 to replace a faulty back cover., Apple did not respond immediately to the allegations, but the issue gained steam as more state media outlets added more criticism. The People's Daily, the official mouthpiece of the Communist Party, also published a series of editorials and articles, including one paper titled Defeat Apple's Incomparable Arrogance., Cook's apology came in the form of a letter posted on Apple's Chinese website., We are aware that a lack of communications...led to the perception that Apple is arrogant and doesn't care or attach enough importance to consumer feedback, Mr. Cook said, according to the letter. We express our sincere apologies for any concerns or misunderstandings this gave consumers., Business Insider posted the full apology on its website., According to the Wall Street Journal, Cook also said in the letter that the company would review and amend its warranty policies for the iPhone 4 and 4S, streamline its customer feedback and be more clear about its warranty policy on its website and with resellers., The news comes as Apple's stock continues to slide, a dip that began last September, when the company was trading at just over $700 a share. The company was trading at $428 a share as of this writing.
A Tesla Model S drives outside the Tesla factory in Fremont, Calif., on June 22. The electric car was named Automobile of the Year by Automobile Magazine and Car of the Year by Motor Trend., A Tesla Model S drives outside the Tesla factory in Fremont, Calif., on June 22. The electric car was named Automobile of the Year by Automobile Magazine and Car of the Year by Motor Trend., Tesla Motors, the car company on a mission to change the auto industry, announced late Sunday that it's finally turning a profit this quarter., The company said it will deliver 4,750 of its flagship Model S, its much-lauded four-door, luxury sports sedan. That amount exceeds its earlier estimates of 4,500 cars sold this quarter., This is good news for the freshman carmaker, whose profits some posited might have been negatively affected by a harsh review in the New York Times, a review Tesla CEO Elon Musk said was full of lies., In a cryptic followup tweet to the announcement, Musk also said the company will have big news Tuesday:, To be clear, Tesla is in California, so it is not April Fool's yet! Also, some may differ, but imo the Tues news is arguably more important., Tesla also said it will discontinue its entry-level option, which was equipped with the smallest battery available, a 40-kilowatt hour version with a much shorter range (about 160 miles). The company said only 4 percent of customers chose the smaller version., Customers are voting with their wallet that they want a car that gives them the freedom to travel long distances when needed, the statement said., The company will stick with its 60-kilowatt hour option, which offers an estimated range of 230 miles per charge.
1 of 10, The fashion industry is sometimes criticized for unrealistic portrayals of young women. But if you're a woman older than 60, there are almost no portrayals, realistic or otherwise. Fashion may be something you have to invent more than follow. A blog called Advanced Style focuses on women who've done just that., The blogger bringing their images to the world is 31-year-old Ari Seth Cohen. His idea of heaven is to wait in the freezing cold on a street corner in the middle of Manhattan hoping a fabulous-looking older woman passes by. When he spots one, he rushes up to her, explains his project, asks for a photo and just generally tries to convince her he's not a weirdo. He's rarely turned down., Cohen says the most influential people in his life were his grandmothers. He loved watching old movies with them and looking through their scrapbooks. And as a little kid, he became fascinated with the way women dressed in the 1930s, '40s and '50s., I used to draw pictures of fancy older ladies as a kid, Cohen says. He collected the drawings in a book, he says, and called it something like Fantastic Ladies with Amazing Style., Blogger Ari Seth Cohen with Ilona Royce Smithkin, 93, one of his most famous subjects., Blogger Ari Seth Cohen with Ilona Royce Smithkin, 93, one of his most famous subjects., Now, he says, the women who I'm photographing, they're the women from my book from when I was a kid, coming alive., Cohen even moved to New York from his native San Diego because one of his grandmothers told him that's where you have to go if you want to be creative. He didn't have anything in particular in mind when he moved there, though., I didn't set out to be a photographer or a writer, he says. I just wanted to do something that I felt inspired by and start sharing it with people., And it has caught on. In addition to his blog, Cohen now has a book called Advanced Style. A coloring book is on the way, and he's raising money to complete a documentary. Cohen has worked on campaigns for Lanvin, Coach and a sunglasses company, all featuring the women he has photographed. Some have become good friends, both with him and with each other., Two of them are Debra Rapoport and Joyce Carpati. They are living proof that there are many different ways to look fabulous. Carpati is 80. She goes for simplicity and elegance. Less is more, she says. I would start with a dark background and add to it with accessories or jewelry., Rapoport, 67, is the opposite of that. She dresses in layers of contrasting patterns topped off by one of her signature hats. They appear to be made from coiled fabric. They're actually Viva brand paper towels, rolled, wrapped and painted. What she doesn't make, she buys in thrift shops., At our age, we've got closets full of wonderful things, says Rapoport. So the challenge is what can I not buy? And thrift shops provide the challenge. I give myself a $5 limit, she says. If I can find something, great. And if I can't, then I really don't need it., The two have traveled with Cohen to book signings around the country and in Europe, and Carpati and Rapoport are clearly having a lot of fun with their Advanced Style adventures. But the impact on another one of the blog's stars has been more profound., Ilona Royce Smithkin, 93, is one of Cohen's most famous subjects. She's well under 5 feet tall and topped off by hair that's a shade of orange not found in nature. Then there are her eyelashes about 2 inches long. I cut off my own hair and made my own eyelashes, she explains. That means they are orange, like her hair. She is determined to be noticed., Sometimes older people are really put into a very hidden spot, Smithkin says. They exist and people know they exist, but they have to fight for themselves instead of being still part of the world, which we are., Smithkin has lived in the same one-room flat for about 60 years. It's crammed with zillions of things as colorful as her hair: clothes, of course, but also art that she has made over a decades-long career. The artwork never brought her fame. The Advanced Style blog has. Now, she gets modeling jobs. She's on billboards. People recognize her on the streets of New York., It's a lovely feeling, she says, like you are part of the world and the world is part of you.
Authorities are investigating what caused an Exxon Mobil pipeline to rupture in Mayflower, Ark., Friday. The oil spill caused 22 homes to be evacuated, according to an Exxon statement., Local station KATV reports homeowners were told Saturday that they might not be able to return for at least a week. Still, KATV says, there are residents who have been satisfied with officials' response. Evacuated resident Daniesha Modica told KATV:, I think they did a great job honestly, I mean we were notified immediately to be evacuated. Exxon has been right there on point as far as accommodations., Crews worked well into Saturday to clean up the spill. Exxon said in a release Saturday that approximately 4,500 barrels of oil and water have been recovered. It says it responded as if there were 10,000 barrels spilled to be conservative., The Environmental Protection Agency considers the incident a major spill, Exxon says., Faulkner County Judge Allen Dodson says the situation could have been much worse, Michael Hibblen of member station KUAR tells our Newscast Desk. Dodson said:, We're just glad that no one was injured, first and foremost, but then once the homes were evacuated, your next concern goes to property and environment., Exxon says authorities are monitoring air quality, adding:, The air quality does not likely present a human health risk, with the exception of the high pooling areas, where clean-up crews are working with safety equipment.
A UPS truck drives along Grant Street on in San Francisco, California., A UPS truck drives along Grant Street on in San Francisco, California., United Parcel Post has agreed to forfeit $40 million it made in payments from pharmacies that shipped controlled substances to Americans without valid prescriptions., Reuters reports:, The company also agreed to put a compliance program into place to prevent illegal online pharmacies from distributing drugs through its shipping services in the future, authorities said., 'Good corporate citizens like UPS play an important role in halting the flow of illegal drugs that degrade our nation's communities,' Northern California U.S. Attorney Melinda Haag said in a statement., UPS cooperated with the investigation, prosecutors said., The Wall Street Journal reports that the Drug Enforcement Administration has been investigating FedEX over the same kind of issues. The paper reports that the company called the probe absurd and deeply disturbing. The spokesman said the government was essentially deputizing the shipping companies, making them responsible for enforcement., According to court papers filed as part of the settlement, UPS employees had numerous exchanges showing they were aware of legal problems surrounding many Internet pharmacies, the Journal reports. Prosecutors say, for example, that UPS knew that customers using the service preferred packages to be delivered at parking lots and roadsides., UPS spokeswoman Susan Rosenberg told Reuters that the company has an obligation and responsibility to help curb the sale and shipment of drugs sold through illegal Internet pharmacies.
Home Depot is hiring 80,000 employees for its spring season. As the housing market picks up, other industry sectors like gardening, construction and furniture move upward, too., Home Depot is hiring 80,000 employees for its spring season. As the housing market picks up, other industry sectors like gardening, construction and furniture move upward, too., When fortunes rise in the housing industry as they currently are it tends to lift sales for other businesses, too. Home construction, sales and prices are all improving. And according to many analysts, the market is gaining steam., For nearly two decades, Scott Gillis has owned his own moving company, Great Scott Moving in Hyattsville, Md. Moving high season is just around the corner, which means Gillis is hiring., I'm doing it right now, I'm calling up all my old employees. Basically, I'm doing as much as possible 'cause I'm anticipating we're having a good summer, Gillis says., That's in contrast to several years ago, when Great Scott moved more people into rental apartments than houses as its sales and staff plunged by a third. Gillis says things have improved. But they're still very hard to predict., 'The Mood Is Much Better', I think the mood is much better than it was five years ago. I think we are heading in a better way, he says. But nobody knows the forecast., The federal spending cuts known as the sequester don't help. And there are pockets of housing weakness. Still, overriding all that, he says, is a sense that things are fundamentally better and improving., When you start seeing larger offices going to smaller offices, it's an indicator that everybody's cutting back. Now I see offices getting larger. And that's usually a good indicator, Gillis says., Part of what's driving the urge to move is that people are spending again., This housing market recovery is a tremendous boost to the economy, says Lawrence Yun, a chief economist for the National Association of Realtors., A Powerful Economic Boost, Yun says residential construction, remodeling, moving, gardening and furniture buying add up to about 20 percent of the country's gross domestic product which is why the upward momentum in housing is such a powerful boost to the economy., But it's not just that. Yun says by year end, U.S. homes will collectively be worth $3 trillion more than they were at the bottom of the market. And that will provide a significant boost in consumer spending $100 billion in extra spending this year, to be exact, he says., Eric Belsky, Joint Center for Housing Studies director at Harvard University, says there's an aphorism about collective psychology in real estate: When the housing market turns, it sounds a whistle that only dogs and homebuyers hear., You kind of get the sense that that whistle's been blown, he says., Low Inventory, Higher Prices, Belsky says a low inventory of homes and greater demand are driving prices up., That's creating a certain amount of momentum in the market, it's making house prices turn around, he says. What it hasn't been doing is getting as many people to put their homes on the market., Comparisons to prior years aren't always helpful, he says, because sales had been boosted by first-time homebuyer tax credits. This year is different., This is happening because the market itself is kind of finding its own sea legs and moving up, Belsky says. And once that happens, that market turns, it tends to have momentum., When asked if he's subject to the psychology of housing, he says: I think we all are. It's nice to feel that house prices are beginning to move up. Have I been spending more? I don't know., 'Customers Are Coming In', Home improvement retailer Home Depot is hiring 80,000 people for its spring season. And Lowe's plans to hire 9,000 extra workers this year on top of 45,000 seasonal hires., We are investing more labor, literally, in the aisle today, because we know that customers are coming in not just for a single maintenance item or a replacement item. They're coming in to engage in projects, and that takes some face-to-face time, says Greg Bridgeford, Lowe's chief customer officer., He says housing isn't just contributing to customers' sense of economic well-being., We're seeing them engage emotionally in their homes again as they have more confidence financially, Bridgeford says., It's also starting to contribute to their happiness, he says.
&ldquo; We bring children up to imagine that there is a right answer, and that intelligence is about knowing that right answer. And therefore if you get a wrong answer, you're stupid., - Margaret Heffernan, Part 4 of the TED Radio Hour episode Making Mistakes., About Margaret Heffernan's TEDTalk, Most people instinctively avoid conflict, but Margaret Heffernan says good disagreement is central to progress. She argues the best partners aren't echo chambers, and how great teams, relationships and businesses allow people to deeply disagree., About Margaret Heffernan, The former CEO of five businesses, Margaret Heffernan explores the all-too-human thought patterns like conflict avoidance and selective blindness that lead managers and organizations astray. How do organizations think? In her book, Willful Blindness, Margaret Heffernan examines why businesses and the people who run them often ignore the obvious with consequences as dire as the global financial crisis and Fukushima Daiichi nuclear disaster., Heffernan began her career in television production, building a track record at the BBC before going on to run the film and television producer trade association, IPPA. In the U.S., Heffernan became a serial entrepreneur and CEO in the wild early days of Web business and was named one of the Internet's Top 100 by Silicon Alley Reporter in 1999.
Retailers are doing all they can to attract consumers, who drive the economy. (File photo from 2012 of a store window in Santa Monica, Calif.), Retailers are doing all they can to attract consumers, who drive the economy. (File photo from 2012 of a store window in Santa Monica, Calif.), There was a slightly larger-than-expected increase of 0.7 percent in consumer spending from January to February, the Bureau of Economic Analysis says., Higher gasoline prices, though, were much of the reason for the rise. According to the bureau, if spending is adjusted for inflation the increase was a more modest 0.3 percent the same as in January. And higher energy costs were behind most of the inflationary pressures last month., Consumer spending is closely watched because consumers buy about 70 percent of all the goods and services that companies produce meaning they drive the economy., Meanwhile, personal income shot up 1.1 percent.
A sign outside Lou Caracciolo's winery, Amalthea Cellars, Halfway between the New Jersey Turnpike and the Atlantic City casinos is a little slice of France: Amalthea Cellars. There's an old farmhouse, and a field full of grapevines., Lou Caracciolo, who founded Amalthea, is walking through the field. Here's something I put in the ground in 1976, he says. You have to have a feel for it, and after 30 years I have a pretty good feel for it., Caracciolo calls himself a hopeless romantic. And, really, you have to be a romantic to try to make a $33 bottle of cabernet sauvignon blend in New Jersey., Amalthea Cellars has to overcome not only the jokes about Jersey, but also the reputation of other New Jersey wines., There are dozens of winemakers in New Jersey. But many of them make a very different kind of wine wine that's cheaper and much sweeter. Just down the road from Amalthea is the Tomasello Winery, whose sweet wine is sold all around the country. It goes very well with cheesecake, Charlie Tomasello says., There's nothing wrong with a $10 cheesecake wine. But it creates a challenge for winemakers who want to make the fancy, dry, French-style wine., Caracciolo and some of the other wine growers in the state want Jersey to be the next Napa Valley. He wants wine collectors, tasting tours, destination weddings. He needs to change people's minds., The winery's first step has been to start with the label. Even though the fancy winemakers are in New Jersey, they want to separate themselves from Jersey. They petitioned the government for a special geographic designation like, say, Napa Valley. So now the fancy wines say they're from the Outer Coastal Plain., I mean, it does sound fancier than New Jersey, Caracciolo says., But a label only gets you so far., The wine business in the state has got to kick that reputation, says George Taber, a wine journalist who used to live in Jersey. And you don't kick it by having 80 percent of the wines in the market be those sweet wines., So Caracciolo has been on a mission. He visits the sweet winemakers and tells them to keep making the sweet stuff but make a few fancy, dry wines on the side., Some of them have responded. Charlie Tomasello, of sweet wine fame, is now selling a $48 bottle of cabernet. It has nice cassis and forward fruit and a little bit of leather and chocolate in there, he says.
The Amazon Kindle e-reader could see greater integration with Goodreads, following Thursday's announcement that the online retail giant was buying the the social book-recommendation site., The Amazon Kindle e-reader could see greater integration with Goodreads, following Thursday's announcement that the online retail giant was buying the the social book-recommendation site., Amazon, the online retail behemoth that has made a much-publicized foray into publishing, has just bought Goodreads, the social book-recommendation site., Amazon and Goodreads share a passion for reinventing reading, Russ Grandinetti, Amazon vice president for Kindle Content, said in a statement on Thursday. Goodreads has helped change how we discover and discuss books and, with Kindle, Amazon has helped expand reading around the world., Financial terms of the deal were not disclosed. The statement said the deal would close in the second quarter of 2013., On Goodreads' blog, co-founder Otis Chandler called the move exciting., We truly could not think of a more perfect partner for Goodreads as we both share a love of books and an appreciation for the authors who write them, he said., Here's more from his post:, I'm excited about this for three reasons: 1. With the reach and resources of Amazon, Goodreads can introduce more readers to our vibrant community of book lovers and create an even better experience for our members. 2. Our members have been asking us to bring the Goodreads experience to an e-reader for a long time. Now we're looking forward to bringing Goodreads to the most popular e-reader in the world, Kindle, and further reinventing what reading can be. 3. Amazon supports us continuing to grow our vision as an independent entity, under the Goodreads brand and with our unique culture., Chandler said one of the top priorities after the sale would be integrating Amazon's Kindle e-reader with Goodreads. The social reading site has 16 million members. It was founded in 2007 by Chandler and the woman who later became his wife, Elizabeth Khuri Chandler., A New York Times story from earlier this year examined book websites like Goodreads and had this to say:, Goodreads and smaller similar sites are addressing what publishers call the 'discoverability' problem: How do you guide consumers to books they might want to read? The digital age has created online retail sites that are overflowing with new books, leaving readers awash in unknown titles., At the same time the number of bookstores has shrunk considerably, depriving customers of the ability to browse or ask staff members for guidance., For a long time Amazon, the largest online bookseller, dominated the digital discovery zone through its book reviews, recommendations and displays on its home page. But Amazon has lost some trust among readers recently amid concerns that its reviews and recommendations can contain hidden agendas., Amazon, of course, started as an online bookseller and now sells everything from cameras to banana slicers. Recently, it announced it was entering the world of original film and TV series. But it is its actions in the world of books that have raised the hackles of traditional publishers as well as its rivals., Thursday's news comes just weeks after Hachette Book Group, Penguin Group (USA) and Simon &amp; Schuster joined forces to launch their own book-recommendation site, Bookish. It also follows Amazon's bid to claim new Internet domains such as .book, .author, and .read attempts that are being fought by the Authors Guild and the Association of American Publishers, as NPR's Annalisa Quinn noted recently., And as NPR's Lynn Neary reported last December, Amazon is among the biggest winner in the world of self-publishing. That's an area in which Goodreads already has expertise., In a 2008 story on NPR's All Things Considered, Goodreads' Chandler talked about the site's author program, which was created specifically for members who write books., It's ending up being a really great way for authors especially smaller, self-published authors to build a fan base, he said., Indeed, Hugh Howey, the sci-fi writer who self-published his best-selling book Wool through Amazon's Kindle Direct Publishing system and got the word out about the work through Goodreads, was one of three people to be quoted in the joint news release announcing Thursday's deal., I just found out my two favorite people are getting married, he said. The best place to discuss books is joining up with the best place to buy books To Be Read piles everywhere must be groaning in anticipation.
A trader on floor of the New York Stock Exchange on March 25, 2013. U, A trader on floor of the New York Stock Exchange on March 25, 2013. U, The Standard &amp; Poor's 500 stock index broke new ground today, closing at 1,569, an all-time high that erased the record set on Oct. 9, 2007., The S&P; joins the Dow Jones Industrial Average, which broke its 2007 record earlier this month., Both indices have now recovered all the losses they suffered during the Great Recession., The Wall Street Journal reports:, The S&P; 500 had flirted with its closing record for two weeks before finally vaulting over that level Thursday. It had come within five points of the closing high in seven of the past 10 sessions., 'The market has been trying and trying, and we finally crossed the line,' said Quincy Krosby, a market strategist at Prudential Financial, PRU -0.20% which manages roughly $1 trillion in assets. 'Having the Dow reaching new highs was good, but the S&P; 500 is broader, it's bigger... it's an important message for investors.', Update at 4:16 p.m. ET. 131 Percent:, The Financial Times has this stunning number: Since hitting an intraday low of 666.79 in March 2009, the S&P; has rallied 131 per cent, boosted by aggressive monetary easing by the Federal Reserve and record US profits from the 500 constituents in the index., This chart shows that huge fall and the recovery that followed:, ^SPX data by YCharts, All of this, notes the paper, is dampened by the fact that the U.S. economy overall has recovered at a very slow pace.
While many people enjoy sweet treats like these chocolate bunnies the price of a key ingredient has some people bitter. A government subsidy program is criticized for keeping sugar prices too high. But as prices fall, the government may buy sugar to help processors., While many people enjoy sweet treats like these chocolate bunnies the price of a key ingredient has some people bitter. A government subsidy program is criticized for keeping sugar prices too high. But as prices fall, the government may buy sugar to help processors., While you indulge in some Easter Peeps and chocolates this weekend, you might want to think about all that sugar. No, this isn't a calorie warning. In the U.S., raw sugar can cost twice the world average., Critics say U.S. sugar policy artificially inflates sugar prices to benefit an exclusive group of processors even though it leads to higher food prices. But this year, prices fell anyway. Now, the government could be poised to use taxpayer dollars to buy up the excess sugar., American sugar starts where you'd expect: in a field, like Gary Gravois' sugarcane crop in Napoleonville, La., It's just something in the culture of South Louisiana, Gravois says. If you're a farmer, that's pretty much what you do., And in the end, that sugar might end up in a jelly bean. Bob Simpson, president of Jelly Belly in California, says it's 40 percent of the product and the most expensive ingredient., A Sweet Deal?, Sugar costs are a complicated combination of import restrictions, production quotas and a kind of guaranteed price., The U.S. sugar system is essentially a Soviet-style control on production, says Chris Edwards, an economist at the Cato Institute., The effect of these policies, he says, is that U.S. sugar prices normally remain artificially high sometimes twice the world price. (Last year, the price of sugar around the world averaged 26.5 cents per pound, compared with 43.4 cents in the U.S.) That hurts food companies and leads to higher prices at the grocery store., The core goal of policymakers has been to push up U.S. sugar prices to the benefit of U.S. sugar growers, Edwards says., A big part of this policy is a sweet loan program for the processors that refine sugar. To pay growers like Gravois right away, processors can take out government loans. The sugar itself is the collateral., This leads to an interesting choice: If sugar prices go up, processors sell it on the open market and make a profit. If prices fall, they can just hand over their sugar to the government and keep the loan money., Sugar's Price Tag, The program is supposed to run at no cost to taxpayers., The loans are typically repaid in most years, says Joe Glauber, chief economist at the U.S. Department of Agriculture., But that could change this year. Even with all those import restrictions and price supports, sugar prices fell. Farmers like Gravois produced a lot more than expected., Last year was the best crop we ever made, Gravois says., That's why processors might now be tempted to forfeit their sugar to the government instead of selling it. This is where your tax dollars come in., The government is considering buying that surplus sugar directly from processors and then selling it at a loss to companies that make ethanol. That would take some of the surplus off the market, boosting processors' profits, but taxpayers could be on the hook for millions of dollars., 'It Is What It Is', The USDA says it's not to blame. The agency just administers what Congress sets in the farm bill., It is what it is. It's been a program that supports a lot of sugar producers and has had a lot of support in Congress over the years, Glauber says., In fact, import tariffs on sugar date back to 1789. Other provisions originated during the Great Depression., Sugar policy has been so contentious for so long that the two sides have derisive nicknames for each other it's Big Sugar versus Big Candy., Representing Big Candy is Bob Simpson from Jelly Belly, who also chairs the National Confectioners Association. We'd just like them to compete on a fair, open market without the intrusion of the federal government, he says., He says Jelly Belly opened a plant in Thailand, partly to get cheaper sugar for markets overseas., Defending Big Sugar is Jack Roney of the American Sugar Alliance., There's really no reason for contention about U.S. sugar policy. It's the most successful of any U.S. commodity policy, says Roney, who adds that in most years this program costs taxpayers nothing unlike other farm supports., He blames falling prices on Mexican imports which, under the North American Free Trade Agreement, are not controlled by tariffs., What To Do With Excess, Roney says the argument over higher food prices is really about food companies lobbying to get sugar prices down. Is that out of some altruistic desire to help consumers? Well, no. It's so they can increase profits, he says., He says ditching the sugar supports would put thousands of jobs at risk., But opposition to the sugar policy has brought together an unusual alliance of libertarian conservatives, environmentalists, food companies and lawmakers from both parties., In the meantime, the government has about six months to decide whether to buy excess sugar using our dollars.
After noticing that most of the lifeguards at the public pools used by Latino and African-American kids were white, the Phoenix aquatics department decided to try to recruit minorities., More than 90 percent of the students at Alhambra High are black, Latino or Asian. On a recruiting effort there over the winter, the city's Melissa Boyle tells students she's not looking for strong swimmers. Like many under-resourced schools, Alhambra doesn't have a swim team., We will work with you in your swimming abilities, Boyle says., Boyle's colleague Kelly Martinez takes on the delicate task of explaining the scenario the city is trying to correct., The kids in the pool are all either Hispanic or black or whatever, and every lifeguard is white, she says, and we don't like that. The kids don't relate; there's language issues. Martinez turns to a Latina student next to her. Do you speak Spanish? she asks. We need more lifeguards who can speak Spanish., Competitive swimming still has a reputation as a white sport. And a national study released in 2010 found African-Americans and Latinos reported much lower swimming proficiency compared to whites., It's that catch-22, says Becky Hulett, who oversees Phoenix's public pools. If the kids don't learn how to swim, as adults they are not going to swim, [and] they aren't going to take their own kids to swim., So two years ago, Hulett began rethinking lifeguard recruitment. Traditionally, Phoenix's 500 lifeguards came from more affluent parts of town, most of which are farther from the public pools., It really populated from schools that had swim teams, and so that was our feeder into our lifeguarding programs, she says., To help diversify its lifeguard ranks, the city raised about $15,000 over the past two years in scholarships to offset the cost of lifeguard-certification courses. Recruits who pass a swim test at the end can apply to be city lifeguards., As the teens swim laps at Alhambra, it's clear many haven't had much formal training. But the coaches of the course aren't fazed and are prepared to put in the time to teach. Honestly, I have a little bit a fear of the water, and I wanted to overcome that fear, says high school junior Jesus Jimenez. He didn't grow up going to pools with his family but likes the idea of lifeguarding. It is nice to have the satisfaction of knowing that if somebody is in trouble you can save them at any time, he says., If he is selected to be a lifeguard, other pool staff will work with him on his swimming skills all summer., This report story was done in collaboration with Fronteras, a public radio project that focuses on border and changing demographics in the American Southwest.
Chocolate Easter bunnies by Swiss company Lindt, left, and Austrain company Hauswirth, which agreed to stop making chocolate Easter bunnies that look like those made by Lindt &amp; Spruengli in 2012., Chocolate Easter bunnies by Swiss company Lindt, left, and Austrain company Hauswirth, which agreed to stop making chocolate Easter bunnies that look like those made by Lindt &amp; Spruengli in 2012., After 12 years, a federal court in Germany has settled an epic Easter battle: It ruled Lindt &amp; Spruengli, the Swiss chocolatier, could not trademark its gold-foil wrapped easter bunny chocolates., Germany's international broadcaster Deutsche Welle reports:, The case in Germany's highest administrative court was the fourth and final one Lindt lost in its attempt to win copyright protection of its Easter bunny model. The court had to answer whether it was legally possible to register a product, which was in general use for decades, as a trademark, said Daniel Terheggen, Riegelein's lawyer from Lindner &amp; Blaumeier Attorneys., 'The ruling has set a legal precedent in copyright law with which we are very satisfied,' he added., Confiserie Riegelein was the only defendant left to face up to Lindt in the courts, after a number of smaller chocolate-making firms succumbed to the pressure exerted by the Swiss giant., Of course Riegelein was very happy., The sitting gold-wrapped bunny has been a firm part of our offering for at least a half century, Peter Riegelein said, according to The Guardian. Now it is finally clear that it can stay as it is., Lindt hinted the fight was not over., We will continue to defend our Lindt gold bunny in the future whenever necessary, the company said in a statement.
The official portrait of retirement has changed, and it didn't change to this., The official portrait of retirement has changed, and it didn't change to this., Retirement ads are everywhere these days. The Villages lures retirees to come live, love and golf in Florida. USAA offers financial counsel to retiring military personnel. Hollywood stars such as Pat Boone and Tommy Lee Jones dole out all kinds of retirement advice in 30-second sermonettes on television and the Internet., Thousands of seniors have turned to One Reverse Mortgage to take control of their retirement, intones Henry The Fonz Winkler in one earnest spot., Old actors don't retire; they just make retirement ads., But the more talk there is of retirement on TV, in pop-up ads, in news stories the more you begin to wonder: What is retirement anymore anyway?, Backyard Hammocks, Time was, the official portrait of a retired American included a steady, dependable pension; leisurely mornings puttering about the house in soft slippers maybe replacing the chain on the toilet tank ball or knitting a doorknob cozy; slow-driving from drug store to grocery to TV repair shop back when TVs could be repaired. Afternoons were for penning letters to faraway friends and checking on the backyard hammock hooks., Oh sure, there was plenty to do foursomes of bridge and long weekend fishing trips. Perhaps for the more privileged a beach house, a houseboat, that long-delayed trip to Mexico City., No mas., I think the word 'retired' needs to be retired, says financial writer Kerry Hannon in her 2012 book, Great Jobs for Everyone 50+. , Baby boomers are either continuing to work much longer or approaching work not as an afterthought, but as a pillar of their retirement plans, Hannon says, as oxymoronic as that sounds., Many older people are continuing to work some out of choice, some out of necessity. Unlike many of our parents, says Hannon, most of us don't have pensions to fall back on to fund not-working for a decade or more. She notes a few statistics: Between 2010 and 2020, people ages 55 and older are projected to be the fastest-growing segment of the U.S. labor force, according to the 2012 Occupational Outlook Handbook, a jobs forecast by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. And, according to recent findings by the Employee Benefit Research Institute, more and more workers say they are planning to delay retirement., Today's 60-year-old might reasonably plan to work at least part-time for another 15 years, Hannon says. That changes the entire definition of retirement today and what it really means. For many retirees, working in retirement is quickly becoming a new stage in career progression., Doesn't the phrase working in retirement render the very notion of retirement and the word obsolete?, Persistence Living, As a word, retirement has already undergone substantial change in its lifetime, says Katherine Martin, head of U.S. dictionaries at Oxford University Press. Its earliest known use in English 1536 referred to withdrawal or retreat in a military context. By the early 17th century, it had taken on a new meaning, referring to the state of living apart from society in seclusion. Then, by the middle of the 18th century, the use that is now most familiar had become common, referring to the action of leaving office, employment or service permanently, now especially due to age., As many Americans are discovering, however: Nothing is permanent. The entire concept of you-work-and-then-retire is over for most people, says Hannon. Retirement is a process. People gradually fade out of the workforce. About 60 percent of the career workers take on a job after exiting their main career. They ease their way into what we used to consider retirement., As older people stay in and return to the workforce, we are seeing social dominoes fall. Employers are having to make new decisions should they hire younger or older folks? Families are seeing the ripple effects as job-seeking young people move in with job-keeping parents. And many older people, Hannon says, really do want to keep working for reasons of mental engagement and social interaction. The money makes it even better, she says, even if it's not a lot., So if we retire the words retire and retirement what should we call that phase of life when people leave office, employment or service permanently especially due to age? Should we have longevity funds instead of retirement funds? Should we say she's re-engaging instead of retiring? And what will we call those living areas that are so popular for American seniors endurance communities perhaps?
The U.S. economy grew at a 0.4 percent annual rate in fourth-quarter 2012, the Bureau of Economic Analysis reported Thursday morning., That's better than both of the earlier estimates of how the economy was doing as the year ended. The bureau initially thought gross domestic product dipped at a 0.1 percent rate the last three quarters of the year. Then it said there was growth at a 0.1 percent annual rate. Now, in its final scheduled revision of the fourth-quarter data, it has settled on growth at a 0.4 percent pace., Nonresidential fixed investment [was] higher than previously estimated, the bureau says. Or as Bloomberg News puts it, there was a bigger gain in business spending than previously thought., Although the quarter's pace has been revised upward, the 0.4 percent growth is still the lowest for any three-month period since first-quarter 2011's scant 0.1 percent increase., Also Thursday morning, the Employment and Training Administration reported there were 357,000 first-time claims for jobless benefits last week, up by 16,000 from the previous week's 341,000., The number of claims basically has ranged between 340,000 and 400,000 since the fall of 2011. It's one in a series of signs that while the economy has been strong enough to be producing jobs at a slow but steady pace, it hasn't been strong enough to bring unemployment down significantly.
A worker hooks up pipe during natural gas drilling by EnerVest on the Barnett Shale near Fort Worth, Texas, in 2012., A worker hooks up pipe during natural gas drilling by EnerVest on the Barnett Shale near Fort Worth, Texas, in 2012., April 23, 2013, March 28, 2013, The millions of Americans who lost factory jobs over the past decade may find this hard to believe, but U.S. manufacturing is coming back to life., The chest compressions are applied by the pumping of cheap, domestic natural gas., We are entering a new era, says economist Jerry Jasinowski, a former president of the National Association of Manufacturers, a trade group. He and other optimists are cheered by the increase in industrial production, which has grown at a 5 percent annualized rate since the Great Recession ended. That's more than twice as fast as the economy as a whole., Some economists are skeptical about just how big, or long-lasting, the impact of cheap gas will be. They say U.S. factories have been perking up primarily because of the usual pent-up demand that follows a deep recession, as well as the global competitive advantage provided by a weaker dollar., Economic historians eventually will look back and decide which assessment proved true, but for now, the manufacturing renaissance theory has broad support, both from business leaders and from most economists. They say manufacturing's future is getting brighter because of fracking an increasingly popular drilling technique used to recover natural gas from shale formations. Fracking is helping guarantee factory owners access to cheap, reliable and abundant energy sources., People landing fracking-related jobs have gotten a lot of media attention in recent years. But many more workers are quietly finding paychecks in factories as manufacturers start to take advantage of lower natural gas prices., Consider: The price for United Kingdom natural gas futures has been hovering around $10 per million British thermal units (a measure of natural gas) while the U.S. equivalent is priced below $4., That difference is a game changer, said Craig Alexander, chief economist from TD Bank Financial Group. There's no question we are seeing a renaissance in manufacturing because ... the cost advantage has shifted to the United States., In the chemical-manufacturing sector alone, companies are building plants worth an estimated $95 billion, according to IHS Global Insight, a forecasting firm., In Freeport, Texas, for example, Dow Chemical Co. is employing armies of construction workers to help with a multibillion-dollar expansion of its facilities there. The new operations will add about 600 new jobs, and spin off many more jobs for truckers, suppliers and others., The sprawling facility will break down natural gas byproducts into their chemical building blocks, to be used to make everything from food packaging to pharmaceuticals., We have low-cost, affordable feed stocks again in North America, Earl Shipp, who runs Dow's Texas operations, told NPR. It's the start of what some of us in the industry call a renewal of our industry in the United States., And in the Houston suburb of Baytown, Chevron Phillips Chemical Co. is investing in a $5 billion expansion of its Cedar Bayou Chemical Complex and other nearby facilities. For most of the last 20 years, the best places for growth capital have been in the Middle East, CEO Peter Cella said., Now, Texas is becoming a magnet for investment. For every one direct chemical job in one of our plants, there are six additional indirect or induced jobs to serve that job, Cella said., And it's not just new plants that are improving employment prospects. In East Millinocket, Maine, for example, the new owner of one of the state's oldest paper mills is looking for ways to drive down costs to keep open the Great Northern Paper Co. plant and save hundreds of jobs. A big part of the plant rescue involves cheap natural gas., Company president Ned Dwyer says the old method of using oil to operate the paper-drying equipment during Maine winters was not cost competitive in the global marketplace. Now, with a switch to natural gas, the factory can survive and even grow, he says., Inexpensive energy allows us to run a second paper machine in the wintertime that nominally produces around 300 tons of paper a day, Dwyer said. It produces another 40 jobs., The Dow Chemical Co. is expanding operations in Freeport, Texas, employing hundreds of workers., The Dow Chemical Co. is expanding operations in Freeport, Texas, employing hundreds of workers., It's all starting to add up. Since 2010, about a half-million manufacturing jobs have been created, bringing the total back to nearly 12 million. That's down sharply from the roughly 15 million manufacturing jobs that existed a decade ago, but the trend has been positive since the end of 2009., Hiring may pick up even more as ships, trains and trucks start converting to natural gas. That widely expected conversion will give domestic manufacturers yet another competitive edge as transportation costs fall., Not everyone is cheering the surge in natural gas production. Environmentalists raise serious concerns about fracking, saying the potential environmental harm may outweigh any short-term economic gains., And some economists say talk of an energy-related renaissance is overblown. A new Goldman Sachs Global Economics analysis provides skeptics with new ammunition., It is true that the U.S. has seen much faster manufacturing output growth than other advanced nations since 2009, it said. And indeed, a big reason for that is: U.S. energy costs are much lower, especially in the case of natural gas., However, U.S. export performance arguably a more reliable indicator of competitiveness remains middling at best, the report concluded. Manufacturing will perk up some in coming years, but only because of a broad economic improvement that benefits all sectors ... not a structural U.S. manufacturing renaissance., Perry Cessna, a 28-year-old who is helping with the expansion of the Chevron Phillips complex in Baytown, doesn't buy the skeptics' arguments not when he sees Texas employers pouring billions into new operations. When a company's investing back in itself, it makes you feel that you can grow, he said., KUHF reporter Andrew Schneider and MPBN reporter Jay Field contributed to this story.
At a Laiki Bank branch in Nicosia, Cyprus, early Thursday, customers lined up to be among the first allowed in., At a Laiki Bank branch in Nicosia, Cyprus, early Thursday, customers lined up to be among the first allowed in., Banks in Cyprus reopened Thursday morning after two weeks in which they had to keep their doors closed as European leaders worked out a bailout deal for the island's struggling financial sector in a bid to keep its problems from triggering similar crises in other ailing EU nations., As Joanna Kakissis tells our Newscast Desk, To prevent bank runs, the government has severely restricted cash withdrawals. These controls could last months. Daily withdrawals, for example, are limited to 300 euros (about $384), and no one can take more than 1,000 euros ($1,284) out of the country. Depositors who have more than 100,000 euros ($128,400) in their accounts face heavy taxes., From 'Morning Edition': Joanna Kakissis reports, Even with the restrictions in place, the BBC adds that branches were replenished with cash overnight and police and private security guards deployed amid fears of a run on the banks by customers., On Morning Edition, Joanna explained how Cyprus became an international tax haven after 200,000 Greek Cypriots were forced to flee the northern part of the island when Turkish troops invaded in 1974 (current population: about 1.1 million). Because the best agricultural land was in the north, Joanna reported, the new nation [in the south] based its economy on financial services. And over time, it became a popular place for wealthy Russians and other internationals to park their money., But Cypriot banks made what turned out to be bad investments notably, in Greek bonds that went bust after that nation's economy went sour in 2010., Now, Joanna says, many Cypriots face the prospect of losing their jobs and the country may have to start from scratch again, just like it did in 1974., From 'Morning Edition': What makes for a good tax haven?, Morning Edition also had a conversation with University of Michigan Law School Professor James Hines about tax havens. According to Hines, the best tax havens are those with strong, transparent finance laws and a free press. Dictatorships, he noted, aren't attractive places to stash cash because dictators tend to make up the rules as they go along and there isn't an independent news media to keep them honest., The world's biggest tax haven? Hines says it's the U.S. By some measures, we are the best tax haven in the world, it just doesn't apply to Americans, he said. We're a great big one, and Britain is probably No. 2.
The Solar Impulse, a solar-powered plane, flies over Switzerland. The makers will be journeying across the U.S. this spring, hoping the flight helps challenge assumptions about what solar technology can do., The Solar Impulse, a solar-powered plane, flies over Switzerland. The makers will be journeying across the U.S. this spring, hoping the flight helps challenge assumptions about what solar technology can do., Next month, a very odd looking plane will take off from Moffett Field in Mountain View, Calif., and head east to New York. The Solar Impulse the world's first solar-powered plane is capable of flying nonstop all day and all night. Its creators plan to fly it across the U.S. this spring, and by 2015 they hope to fly a similar aircraft around the world., Its wingspan is longer than a 747 Boeing, but the entire plane weighs less than a car., That was the challenge, says Andre Borschberg, one of the creators and a pilot. He says the wings are so large in part to generate lift and in part to create a bigger surface to integrate solar cells., Without Fuel And With An Idea, The idea to try to build a solar-powered plane that could fly nonstop through the night began with Borschberg's partner, Bertrand Piccard, who became internationally famous in 1999 after circumnavigating the world in a balloon. But while on the trip, Piccard nearly ran out of fuel., He really asked himself if it could ... be possible to get rid of this [fuel] dependence. So that is how the idea started, Borschberg says., Design work on the plane began 10 years ago. Today, standing under buzzing fluorescent lights inside a huge hangar, the Solar Impulse looks like some kind of giant, space-age great egret on steroids., Its long, delicate wings are covered in photovoltaic cells. They tilt up at the ends. The plane has four electric engines and a narrow little cockpit that seats just one person., A Purposeful Design, Everything about its design was dictated by the size of the wings and the power of the sun striking them. Borschberg says through physics and aerodynamics the developers discovered they couldn't make it heavier than the weight of a car if they wanted to operate it over 24 hours. That was the starting point, he says., The solar-powered plane flies at night., To keep the weight down, they used a carbon-fiber frame and as few batteries as possible, and stripped the cockpit bare. In this plane the toilet is built into the pilot's seat., There is no heating, there's no pressurization, so we need an oxygen mask, Borschberg says. So, yes, it's more difficult and maybe less comfortable than flying through an airliner., But the designers succeeded in creating a plane capable of flying continuously without using any fuel., The contact with the external world is much more intense, Borschberg says. He describes the ride as a close relationship with the environment you can hear more and feel more of the outside compared with a regular aircraft., Two years ago, Borschberg kept this plane aloft over the Swiss Alps for 26 straight hours. And last summer, he flew it from Spain to North Africa., Its Flight Intricacies , But it's tricky to fly., The plane isn't at jet speed yet it can only fly at 40 or 50 mph. It travels so slow that sometimes when it turns into the wind, it appears to float in place on radar screens, or occasionally even slide backward., During long daytime flights, the pilots will climb to almost 30,000 feet and then slowly descend during the night. It's one more way to conserve energy., We had to learn to do things very slowly, to wait to see the reaction, to be patient, Borschberg says., And to also be careful, because the wings are so long and the plane is so slow, even a slight bank can cause the tip of the inside wing to lose lift., Pilots only turn a few degrees when flying the plane, because if they turn too sharply, the Solar Impulse could tumble out of the sky. So designers created a unique physical warning system that vibrates the pilot's arm when a turn is too steep, Borschberg says., When Piccard and Borschberg attempt to fly around the world, one of them will need to remain in the pilot's seat over the Pacific Ocean for four or five days straight. The makers recognize that solar will never power commercial flights, but Borschberg said this flight was meant to push people's assumptions about what solar technology can do.
In Long Beach, Wash., Chinook Observer editor and publisher Matt Winters has overseen his paper's transition to the Internet and, more recently, to a pay wall., In Long Beach, Wash., Chinook Observer editor and publisher Matt Winters has overseen his paper's transition to the Internet and, more recently, to a pay wall., The Washington Post and the San Francisco Chronicle recently said they will start charging readers for online content, joining big papers like The New York Times and The Wall Street Journal. Some large papers have made it work because they offer a lot of unique content., But the same holds true for tiny community newspapers, like the weekly Chinook Observer tucked in an isolated corner of Washington state., Newspapers big and small have a similar goal: economic survival., An Avid Reader, Steve Rogers is a commissioner for Pacific County along the coast of Washington state. The county is about the size of Rhode Island but only has 20,000 residents. In the parking lot of the McDonald's in the town of Long Beach, Rogers climbs into his truck to take advantage of the free Wi-Fi., He pulls out his iPad to show all the news he reads online: Seattle Times, P-I [Seattle Post-Intelligencer], Washington Post, New York Post, Christian Science Monitor ... , But his favorite news app is the Chinook Observer. It's a weekly newspaper with a print circulation of 5,500, published in Long Beach. Rogers reads everything in it from a front-page story about plans for a marijuana grow operation all the way to job ads., 'Nothing's Free', Rogers subscribes to the print version, so he gets the app for free. But he's thinking about going to a Web-only subscription. (A one-year print subscription costs $36; a Web-only subscription is $33.), I had a little bit of reluctance at first because we have the sense of the Internet being free, Rogers says. Well, nothing's free. They have to hire people to do all these things., The Chinook Observer office is a quick walk from the windswept Pacific coastline. Today, the paper has just come out, and people are walking in to plunk down four quarters for a copy., In back is editor and publisher Matt Winters. He has been here long enough to remember how it felt when his paper first went online in the late 1990s. All of a sudden the Observer's stories could be read in Australia or Russia., We, as everybody did in our industry, just loved the idea because we're all just inherently, in the business, have this passionate desire to get information out to people and tell stories, he says., 'How Does This Compute?', After a while, Winters says, some harsh economic realities became clear. Digital advertising is not lucrative, and print circulation has been falling., Out here in the hinterlands, we were sort of looking at this model of, gee, you know, we're giving away all this stuff we've agonized over the week to produce. How does this compute? he says., The answer is, it doesn't. So, the paper put up a pay wall. In fact, more small papers have started charging than have large papers. That's according to research by Mike Jenner, a professor at the Missouri School of Journalism. He says it's partly because many small papers have a news monopoly the Chinook Observer is the only one covering the Long Beach City Council. Still, Jenner says pay walls aren't magic., It's not going to replace the lost advertising revenue, but at this point these newspapers are looking for oxygen, and this is a little flow of oxygen for them, he says., As a reporter for the Observer, Amanda Frink has covered everything from a murder investigation to the annual cranberry harvest. She says she's glad the paper has a pay wall now, but still: I think eventually it's going to become the point where maybe there aren't newspapers anymore. So this whole pay wall transition is necessary to keep jobs like mine, she says, adding, with a laugh, I certainly hope it does., The Chinook Observer has been around since 1900. The paper's staff hope it's taking the right steps to make sure the publication is still here at the close of this century.
For most Americans, the math for a comfortable retirement may never add up., For most Americans, the math for a comfortable retirement may never add up., According to recent census figures, Americans ages 55 to 65 had about $45,000 in savings and assets, not including their homes. In another survey, by the Employee Benefit Research Institute, 57 percent of American workers said they have less than $25,000 in total savings and investments. That's not much to supplement Social Security to get them through the rest of their years., Morning Edition's Renee Montagne talked to three experts about retiring with little savings., Michelle Singletary, personal finance columnist for The Washington Post, on rethinking expectations, You've got to just think differently about your retirement if you have no savings, Singletary says., She suggests downsizing for those who don't own their home outright. For those who can't downsize, she suggests taking on a roommate or perhaps asking a relative to move in to help split the rent., You've just got to think out of the box and not be so stubborn. People say, 'I can't live with anybody. I can't sell the house,' she says. But what's the alternative? For you to sit there and struggle and lose the house anyway? Or stress out your adult children or other relatives while you try to make things work?, Tim Maurer, financial planner, on moving someplace cheaper and getting a job, Maurer works with clients in the Washington, D.C., area, where houses average $370,000. He often encourages them to look south, to states like North Carolina., Take a look at Charlotte, a very diverse city with all sorts of business opportunities as well as pleasure, and here we're talking about a median home price of $126,600, and then you can buy a house for less than half the cost. And if you buy the house that you need at this stage of the game something a little bit smaller, more comfortable you can actually have a net gain where you can take the excess funds from selling your house, add it to your retirement nest egg, and now you're also paying less every day for the rest of your life because the cost of living is lower., Maurer also says a new or part-time job can supplement Social Security income. Downgrading careers doesn't have to be a bad thing., I've had clients who spent a lifetime in engineering [who] love getting a job at Home Depot because it was the place they loved to go on Saturdays. They have good benefits there. People are getting jobs at a place like Starbucks. These [are] places that tend to pay reasonably well, certainly below what they may have expected or received over the course of their careers, but it's something that they really, genuinely enjoy doing. And as a result, those job opportunities are out there, because they are not always the highest paying., Mary Beth Franklin of Investment News, on making the most out of Social Security, If you plan to keep working while you claim Social Security benefits, you're going to end up losing some of those benefits basically giving them back. So my No. 1 rule is if you plan to keep working, don't take Social Security benefits before your normal age of 66. Once you get to 66, this thing called the earnings cap that can claw back some benefits goes away.
Nick d'Aloisio displays his mobile application Summly, which Yahoo recently purchased for a reported $30 million. But the Internet company is killing the app and integrating the algorithm that drives it into its own technology., Nick d'Aloisio displays his mobile application Summly, which Yahoo recently purchased for a reported $30 million. But the Internet company is killing the app and integrating the algorithm that drives it into its own technology., The news of Yahoo's purchase of Summly, the news-summarizing app created by 17-year-old British wunderkind Nick D'Aloisio, rippled through the news world on Tuesday., The acquisition, while notable for going to an entrepreneur so young, is hardly the largest or most surprising. The app had millions of downloads after its November release, but it had no real monetization strategy. And unlike, say, Facebook buying Instagram and leaving it intact, Yahoo said it is killing the app (in fact it is already gone from the iOS App Store); so Yahoo isn't buying an audience or a user base, either., What the Internet company appears to be taking a big gamble on is a good story, some young talent and an algorithm. It bought math., While Yahoo did not disclose the amount of the deal, Kara Swisher of All Things D told NPR's Jeff Brady that it was about $30 million ... 90 percent in cash and 10 percent in stock. She says the purchase is part of the restructuring under new CEO Marissa Mayer and her plan to bolster Yahoo's mobile efforts., Increasingly, technologies, like finance, and, in Summly's case, news aggregation, are becoming algorithm based; an algorithm simply being a set of step-by-step instructions to produce an output. So could these algorithms, math essentially, be the next tech bubble?, In his TEDx talk, Christopher Steiner, author of Automate This: How Algorithms Came to Rule Our World, said, The story of the next 20 years is the story of big data and algorithms., Including finance and the tech world, algorithms and algorithmic science is already finding heavy use in medicine, sports and the music industry, Steiner says, and that is only going to increase., Just how much will we allow algorithms to take over? Steiner wonders., Part of that might depend on whether other companies follow Yahoo's lead and begin doling out large payouts for algorithms that solve their problems. One can posit a future in which computer science and math students simply create and sell algorithms, and not products, to the highest bidder. Why go through the trouble of bringing an app to market when you can just sell the science?, During the dot-com bubble, you saw companies pouring huge amounts of money into unproven websites of all stripes, based on the hype of the Internet boom. Many of those sites failed, and companies lost billions., As we saw in the Flash Crash of 2010, algorithms can also fail to huge consequences. As we increasingly integrate these algorithms into things that drive our daily lives, failures are inevitable., Writing on Slashdot, however, Nick Kolakowski isn't sure we're quite headed for a new bubble quite yet:, It's tempting to view all that acquisition and IPO activity and think, 'bubble.' But a true tech bubble occurs only when irrationality takes over, and otherwise-sane investors start pouring fortunes into, say, Websites that specialize in pet accessories. While much of the current activity appears bubbly, many of the companies shelling out the billions also boast solid fundamentals: nobody is going to confuse Google, Apple, or Amazon with Pets.com. Even Facebook, which saw its stock price tumble from its IPO heights, still makes money thanks to a viable corporate strategy., OK, so perhaps we're not quite there yet, and computer science students shouldn't start planning how they will spend their millions when they sell that sweet new algorithm written in grease pencil on their window., But as technology moves forward, and companies spend millions on increasingly intangible products in the hope that it will pay off down the line, you have to wonder if that bubble is lurking just below the surface.
Starbucks is among the companies that have filed a brief against the Defense of Marriage Act, being challenged at the Supreme Court on Wednesday., Starbucks is among the companies that have filed a brief against the Defense of Marriage Act, being challenged at the Supreme Court on Wednesday., On Wednesday, the U.S. Supreme Court will hear a challenge to the Defense of Marriage Act the federal law that defines marriage as between a man and a woman. And among those asking the justices to strike it down is a broad cross section of corporate America., Nearly 300 companies have filed a brief arguing that the law called DOMA for short hits them where it counts: their bottom lines., Boston lawyer Sabin Willett smiles, remembering when he sent the brief to be printed at a shop in New York., The printer, he said: 'All these pages and pages of corporations,' he says, 'you know what that's going to cost? My God,' he says, 'You have to list them all?!' I said, 'That's the whole point!' Willet recalls., On the list are Johnson &amp; Johnson, Starbucks and Citigroup. There's Apple, Nike and Morgan Stanley, too. And it even includes municipal employers Boston, Seattle and Los Angeles, and some counties and chambers of commerce. So many signed up 278 in all that the appendix listing them is longer than the written argument itself., Jack Christin, associate general attorney at eBay, says the case against DOMA is pretty simple. It's bad for business, he says. It's bad for our company and our employees. And it simply needs to go., The Defense of Marriage Act prevents same-sex couples from getting medical coverage and other tax and retirement benefits that other employees receive for their spouses. And that complicates things for any business that employs people in any of the nine states and Washington, D.C., where same-sex couples are lawfully married., We're basically treating people differently, says Mark Roellig, general counsel at MassMutual Financial. He says DOMA forces his company to keep track of a dual system, and that costs time and money., You have to keep separate sets of books. You've got to continually be adjusting. And then also picking up the potential legal risk if you make a mistake, he says. So it's ongoing administrative costs that are pretty significant., His company does not want to discriminate, Roelling says. So MassMutual uses a workaround to give employees benefits for their same-sex spouses. But then DOMA forces those employees to pay more in taxes and MassMutual pays more, too., Profit cuts are not the only reason businesses are complaining about the law it's also about the work environment. Hannah Grove, executive vice president at State Street, a financial firm, says DOMA is hurting company's ability to create an inclusive atmosphere., In order to compete in today's global competitive environment, our employees are one of our greatest assets, Grove says., &ldquo; Cultural change takes time, and I think this is the time., - Paul Guzzi, CEO, Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce, And Paul Guzzi, CEO of the Greater Boston Chamber of Commerce, says, Talent is talent. He has signed the brief opposing DOMA. He says in the nine years since Massachusetts was the first state to legalize same sex marriage, normally risk-averse conservative companies have come around., Cultural change takes time, and I think this is the time, he says., Guzzi says the broad range of businesses now denouncing DOMA maybe more than anything else reflects a growing mainstream acceptance of same-sex marriage., Any public backlash would have happened a long time ago. We're hopeful that the law catches up with where as the brief shows a lot of corporate America is, says Thomas Maloney, director of government affairs at Marriott. His company signed the brief without fear of getting boycotted, he says., Overall, 278 employers signed on to oppose the Defense of Marriage Act. The number of companies that filed a brief arguing DOMA is good for business? Zero.
A newly built home in San Diego., A newly built home in San Diego., The housing recovery continues:, Average home prices rose 7.3 percent from December to January in their 10-city composite index and 8.1 percent in a broader 20-city list, according to the data crunchers who produce the S&P;/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices., The biggest year-over-year gains were in Phoenix, where prices were up 23.2 percent from January 2012., Tuesday's report is just the latest in a string of positive signs about the housing sector, which began a long slide in 2008., Later this morning, the private Conference Board is due to release its March consumer confidence report. We'll update when that happens., Update at 10:15 a.m. ET. Confidence Drops:, The Conference Board's consumer confidence index fell to 59.7 in March from 68.0 in February, the business research group says., Lynn Franco, the board's director of economic indicators, says in a press release that this month's retreat was driven primarily by a sharp decline in expectations, although consumers were also more pessimistic in their assessment of current conditions. The loss of confidence, particularly expectations, mirrors the losses experienced this past December and January. The recent sequester has created uncertainty regarding the economic outlook and as a result, consumers are less confident.
Pam Thatcher and her family ultimately moved into her mother's two-bedroom apartment because they couldn't make rent., It's a visual no parent wants to picture: a child describing what it's like to live in a house with no power for lights, heat or cooking. For many middle-class American parents, it's hard to imagine their family ever facing a situation like that. But a new HBO documentary suggests that many seemingly prosperous parents are only a few misfortunes away from dark houses and empty refrigerators., The film, American Winter, follows the personal stories of eight middle-class families in Portland, Ore., who were hit hard during the Great Recession. Once financially stable, they now find themselves struggling. Emmy Award-winning filmmakers Joe and Harry Gantz known for their tell-all series Taxicab Confessions show these families desperately trying to make ends meet during the winter of 2011, even as headlines everywhere indicate a recovery for America., Diedre Melson, John Cox and Pam Thatcher are three of the parents featured in the film. All three are college-educated and at one point considered themselves middle class, a group the film refers to as the most endangered species in America., Melson, Cox and Thatcher live in different neighborhoods, mingle in different circles and have different backgrounds. But in 2011 they all had one thing in common: Their financial struggle brought them to Portland's 211info emergency hotline., My husband, Brandon, went out to look for work, and I was stressing because I had very little diapers; I was worried about formula, Thatcher tells NPR. She is married with two young boys, and it was the first time she had found herself in need of assistance. I went ahead and called [211info] and I was actually looking for help with rent or utilities., For Cox, a housing crisis is what led him to seek help. American Winter shows him struggling to control his emotions when he has to ask his father for help paying the bills. Before he was laid off three years ago, Cox was an accountant who earned a nearly $60,000 salary. He had never really thought about social services or public assistance., I had a little bit of compassion for the folks [who rely on social services], but I never thought it would happen to me, he says. In fact I was so oblivious to it, I didn't know how to go about getting the assistance., As for Melson, she sometimes donated her plasma and often spent weekends picking up scrap metal to make ends meet., Public And Private Shame, In American Winter, all three of these parents express a sense of shame at ending up in their current situation. There's a stigma attached to people who ask for assistance, Melson explains. People have the tendency to believe that there was something that you did to make yourself get in that situation and now you're begging, when in all actuality I don't think any of us here did anything particular to get into our situations. I think all of it was based on each of us basically losing our source of income., Thatcher describes a different kind of stigma she felt during a trip to a church assistance center. She says people were talking about her wedding ring and her kids' clothing, suggesting that she was doing fine and didn't really need any help. They sat right next to me and they were saying it as a normal conversation, as you and I are, she says. And it killed me. It's already hard; it is already degrading. And for someone to sit there in a casual conversation and talk bad about you, it hurt me so much more., But public shame wasn't the only source of pain for these unexpectedly impoverished parents. The sting of being unable to afford things for their children was particularly harsh: At one point in the film, Melson is shown talking with her son about a wrestling tournament he was invited to. It's a national competition in Nevada and it costs $500., Unfortunately, he was not able to make it, Melson tells NPR. And that has to be one of the hardest things as a parent, is to not to be able to provide those things for your child. A once-in-a-lifetime opportunity has gone by because you can't afford it. You feel like a failure., Thatcher felt a similar sense of shortcoming around the holidays. I know that we didn't have a Christmas, she says. I know that I couldn't buy one gift. That was one Christmas that you can't buy your children anything, and that hurts so bad., With so much shame surrounding their situations, some might wonder why American Winter's families agreed to be filmed., This is hard, Cox says, but we're not doing this just for us. This is not happening just in Portland or just in Houston or just in Philadelphia. This is happening nationwide. And a lot of people think it's just them., &ldquo; I'm in limbo. I don't know where I'm going to be in 30 days., - John Cox, Melson adds that she wants people to talk about their struggles especially if it's happening to them. We want them to become a community and to feel OK looking for help. Nobody asked to have this happen to them., Still 'In Limbo', Some of the parents are in better financial situations now than they were when the film was shot, but that doesn't mean they have regained their spot in the middle class. Cox, for instance, has managed not to lose his home to foreclosure yet., We're still in the house, he says. But right now I'm in limbo. I don't know where I'm going to be in 30 days. I've never considered it my house; I've always considered it my kid's house. Geral has Down syndrome, and I know I have to do something for him for when I'm not around, you know, when he gets older. And I gotta do things to make his life more comfortable. And I sit and worry about my kid. What's going to happen to him in 30 years when I'm not around? That is an absolute scary thought for me., Melson and Thatcher murmur their agreement., It's really demoralizing, Cox says, even though I still have the ability to, more or less, you know, keep my head up and think, 'Well, tomorrow's another day.'
While equal rights occupy a large part of the debate over same-sex marriage, federal taxes are also a concern for gay couples. Experts say repealing the Defense of Marriage Act will affect some same-sex couples when they file their taxes., While equal rights occupy a large part of the debate over same-sex marriage, federal taxes are also a concern for gay couples. Experts say repealing the Defense of Marriage Act will affect some same-sex couples when they file their taxes., When advocates for gay marriage talk about it, they usually focus on the struggle for equality and civil rights., But how the Supreme Court decides the Defense of Marriage Act case being argued this week could possibly have big implications in another arena the money same-sex couples owe the Internal Revenue Service., The case that could throw out a law that defines marriage as between a man and woman started with a tax bill., Edie Windsor married her partner of more than 40 years in Canada in 2007. Their relationship was recognized by the state of New York, where they lived together. But when her spouse died two years later, Windsor inherited a huge estate tax bill a bill she would have avoided if her marriage had been recognized under federal law., Gay Couples Plan Ahead, The big thing that people need to be aware of is that you have to actively plan if you're LGBT in your estate or individual taxes, because the law is not set up to protect you, says Nanette Lee Miller, an accountant who works with gay and lesbian clients., Miller says many of those couples are watching the Supreme Court this week for clues about what's in store for their own finances., They don't get a marital deduction for estate tax purposes, so they usually need access to cash or life insurance to be able to inherit their partner's share of a home or other assets., That could change, if the high court rules for Windsor and declares the 1996 Defense of Marriage Act unconstitutional. In that case, same-sex couples would get the same estate tax benefits as married partners., Roberton Williams of the Urban Institute in Washington, D.C., says those savings would help just a tiny fraction of people., Very, very few people pay estate taxes, he says. We estimate that with today's exemption level of $5 million, less than two-tenths of 1 percent of deaths result in a taxable estate., Individual Tax Returns Will Be Affected, A ruling that the entire DOMA law is unconstitutional would have a much bigger impact on individual tax returns the ones filed by same-sex married couples or registered domestic partners every year., If failure to recognize same-sex couples for tax purposes is unconstitutional, then it would be unconstitutional also to insist that it be a man and a woman husband and wife who file a joint return, says Patricia Cain, a law professor at Santa Clara University in California., Cain says the ability for same-sex couples to file taxes jointly will be a mixed bag., That's good for some people and bad for others, Cain says. In other words, you know, we have a marriage bonus when you have a couple with one high earner and one stay-at-home partner or low-income partner. And those people usually experience a tax bonus when they file jointly., The Good, And The Bad, So, generally, good news for couples whose incomes are wide apart, but bad for some other same-sex couples with roughly similar incomes., The numbers are complicated, and many couples are asking accountants such as Miller for advice., She says people who may get some tax benefits if DOMA is overturned are thinking about amending their tax returns for the past three years to try to collect some extra money., For individuals you can go back to 2009, 2010, 2011, and you can also file an amended return, or there's a form to fill out in taking advantage of married filing jointly, Miller says., But she says some clients have been surprised to find out they'll pay the dreaded marriage penalty, and they're not happy., They go, 'What, there's a penalty?' she says., She says she tells them that's just a price of equality.
BlackBerry's Z10: Disappointing launch., BlackBerry's Z10: Disappointing launch., Goldman Sachs on Monday downgraded BlackBerry after a disappointing launch for the company's new smartphone, the Z10., The Wall Street Journal reports that Goldman slashed its investment rating on the Canada-based company formerly known as Research in Motion, or RIM to neutral from buy, citing weak support for the new product., While we thought the international launch was solid, the U.S. launch is critical for BlackBerry's ultimate success, Goldman analyst Simona Jankowski wrote in a research note quoted by the Journal. Our retail checks at over 20 store locations since March 22, including at AT&T;, Best Buy, BBY and Radio Shack, revealed a surprising lack of marketing support and poor positioning of the product. We also saw limited advertising around the launch., Forbes quotes Citi analyst Jim Suva, who rates BlackBerry a sell, as saying his checks revealed shockingly low support by AT&T; with extremely limited signage for the Z10., After last week's stalled launch, BlackBerry stock tumbled., The handheld BlackBerry once dominated the smartphone business, but in recent years Apple's iPhone has captured 38 percent of the market. The Z10 has been cast as a make or break moment for RIM to make back some ground., Speaking to The Associated Press last week, CEO Thorsten Heins acknowledged that the U.S. market is essential to the company's future., You got to win here to win everywhere else, he said. That's just the way it is. We've lost market share quite a bit, to put it mildly, and we absolutely need BlackBerry 10 to turn us around.
As this year's tax deadline approaches, hundreds of thousands of low-income Americans are relying on free services to help them with their returns., Tax preparation fees even a few hundred dollars can be a burden for those living on the margins. And taxpayers desperate for cash can fall prey to high-cost loan offers that eat into their refunds, At the free tax-preparation site at the main library in Washington, D.C., about 30 taxpayers wait for help from volunteers., Millicent Gamble is hoping for a big refund this year. Last year, the retired hotel worker got more than $1,000 back from the government. She already knows how she wants to use this year's check., To pay my rent and maybe take care of some doctor's bills and so forth, Gamble says., It seems almost everyone here plans to use their refunds if they get them for basic expenses. Teresa Hinze of Community Tax Aid, the nonprofit that provides this free tax help in collaboration with the IRS, says the group's clients' average income is about $17,000 a year., They don't have the money to pay tax-preparation fees, Hinze says., But, she says, some people who should come for help do not; they're either unaware that it's available, or they need some quick cash. They turn instead to private preparers or other programs that offer short-term loans in advance of getting their money back from the government. Hinze says it can be a risky move., The average fee in this area is around $170 to $200. And we had a woman a couple of years ago who paid $900, she says. But the woman didn't realize it because the fee was deducted from her refund., Chi Chi Wu with the National Consumer Law Center in Boston says there are plenty of pitfalls out there for desperate low-income taxpayers. She says this year the good news is that regulators have stopped banks from offering something called refund anticipation loans. These loans charged taxpayers exorbitant fees to borrow against their expected refund. She says the bad news is that they've been replaced with something else., It's called the refund anticipation check, Wu says. It's kind of like a cousin of the refund anticipation loan., Instead of borrowing the whole refund amount, individuals can pay extra to have their tax preparation fee delayed and deducted from their refund. A typical charge might be only $30, but Wu says paying that to effectively borrow a $200 tax preparation fee for a few weeks can be costly., If you calculate that out at as an annualized percentage rate, an APR, that's the equivalent of 260 percent, she says., Companies that offer such services say they help those who can't pay the tax preparation fee upfront. But consumer advocates say all these things chip away at the refunds of those who can least afford it. Wu also warns that while banks no longer offer refund anticipation loans, payday lenders and others are stepping into the void which can be even riskier., I wanted to see for myself, so I decided to go online and do a quick word search. Within seconds of typing tax, refund loan, the screen is filled with offers. I click on one of them, and there, next to a smiling woman with a handful of dollar bills, is a flashing sign that says Get Cash Now!, Underneath, it reads: Tax refund loans are available now. Just apply above and receive an approval within just 90 seconds., That sounds pretty attractive., But the site wants some personal information like my bank account, bank routing and Social Security numbers. I decide to go with some made-up ones to see what happens. And lo and behold, in just over a minute, I get a message that I've been pre-approved for a one-week loan of up to $750., But here's the fine print: The annual percentage rate, if I agree to this, is 1,368.75 percent. Wow., It's really just a payday loan, prohibited in some states but not all. Wu says you also don't know who's getting your personal financial information. It could be a scam. Her advice? Find a free tax preparation site. There are 13,000 across the country. The IRS also offers free online filing for low-income taxpayers.
About half the juvenile offenders released from prison on Rikers Island in New York return within a year, New York City Department of Corrections Commissioner Dora Schriro says., About half the juvenile offenders released from prison on Rikers Island in New York return within a year, New York City Department of Corrections Commissioner Dora Schriro says., In the New York City prison system, the outlook for juvenile offenders is bleak. They're falling through the cracks, being arrested repeatedly, and being re-released onto the same streets only to be picked up again., The criminal justice system is failing these 16- and 17-year-olds, says Dora Schriro, the commissioners of the city's Department of Corrections., Just about half of them are going to return to jail in less than a year of their release from our system, she says. And so that means right now one out of two is failing. They're being rearrested, charged with new crimes, and coming back., So last year, the New York City Department of Corrections did something no other city in America has ever done it asked for private, corporate investors. Goldman Sachs opted to invest $9.6 million in the Adolescent Behavioral Learning Experience program, a new curriculum that seeks to bring down the number of youth offenders going back to prison., Social Impact Bonds, Alicia Glen, the director of the Goldman Sachs Urban Investment Group, says the company is investing the money over four years. It's what's called a social impact bond. Glen says it's a a new way of thinking about financing social goods., Essentially what it is, is saying we can use private capital to finance a government-sponsored program, she says. So you have the private sector paying for the service, and then the government saying if the service works, we will pay you X dollars based on the level of impact that's achieved., New York's program is the first one in the U.S. Schriro says the city hopes that by teaching kids basic coping mechanisms, the city can reduce by 10 percent the number of kids getting rearrested., Glen says if recidivism rates can be reduced, Goldman Sachs stands to see a return on investment. But there's still a financial risk, she says., If this program doesn't work at all, the city will not be repaying back our loan, she says. So we hope and expect the program will work, and if we in fact ... are right, that they can achieve a real reduction in recidivism, Goldman Sachs stands to make $2.4 million on their investment., Who Should Take Responsibility?, Not everyone is comfortable with the idea of a big bank making a profit off a government program. Mark Rosenman, who directs the nonprofit Caring to Change, which helps nonprofits and charities decide how to get funding, says this move might be detrimental to nonprofits working on these issues., I think it is building a new industry of intermediaries of consultants, of lawyers, of accountants lots of people who are going to be involved in structuring these bonds and who will drain off resources that would otherwise go to nonprofit organizations, Rosenman says., He also says letting private companies invest in social programs undercuts the role of government., We're substituting private profit for public responsibility, he says. We are in effect saying that the market can support these activities and make a profit and allowing government to walk away from supporting the activities., Scarce Resources Makes For New Partners, But Schriro says the Department of Corrections isn't walking away from its responsibility the agency just can't afford to be picky when it comes to funding., There are scarce resources, and correctional systems and other public service agencies look to partners in the philanthropies. But those are fixed resources, she says. We're very very excited about the possibilities that the social impact bond provide., It will be a little more than three years before the success of New York's social impact bond experiment is clear. In the meantime, other U.S. cities, including Boston and Fresno, Calif., are considering similar proposals., Schriro says it is only fitting that big companies should invest in making their communities better., We all benefit from safe and secure communities, Schriro says. To have a viable criminal justice system is just as critical to those who work in a community as to those who live there.
Pittsburgh fans try to distract Wichita State's Ron Baker as he shoots a free throw during a second-round game in the NCAA college basketball tournament in Salt Lake City on Thursday. The distractions of the tournament are so great that worker productivity suffers., Pittsburgh fans try to distract Wichita State's Ron Baker as he shoots a free throw during a second-round game in the NCAA college basketball tournament in Salt Lake City on Thursday. The distractions of the tournament are so great that worker productivity suffers., March Madness is here. Even President Obama has filled out a NCAA Division I men's college basketball tournament bracket. His pick to win it all was Indiana University., The bracket frenzy is unbelievable, says Deborah Stroman, who teaches sports administration at the University of North Carolina., Right after the selection show for the teams, she says, within three hours, at least 693,000 brackets were filled out. So you can imagine everything that was taking place everything from the research, to calling your friends, to placing bets., But there is a cost. A recent study estimated the springtime mania costs American companies at least $134 million in the first two days alone. Fans all over the country know why: The games are simply too distracting., Lucas Lux, a University of Kansas fan, told NPR, If Kansas played at 12:15 p.m., there's no way I could work, and at that point it would probably have to be a vacation day., But many employees try to multitask instead. Jerry Webber, the owner of a record shop in Pittsburgh, explained that at his shop they would watch the games during the workday. Sometimes we drink beer and have a little bottle of bourbon and take a shot too, he said. It's the illusion of working., Stroman says the loss of worker productivity during March Madness has a lot to do with psychological investment in the games. You have people who actually become so engaged with their teams that they take on the ownership of that team, she tells weekends on All Things Considered guest host Don Gonyea., She calls that effect, basking in reflected glory, or BIRG-ing. She says it can distract employees from their work for days or even weeks after a big win., The opposite effect, she says, is called cutting of reflected failure, or CORF-ing, which is when a loss provokes depression in die-hard fans. This, too, distracts workers from their jobs., But, Stroman says, there is a silver lining for employers. Some employees will turn only part of their attention to games during the workday, and others will likely come in early or stay late to make up for those distracted hours., Some fans even say a win could make them better employees in the long run. Lux says March Madness is actually good for his productivity, but only if the University of Kansas wins., Especially if Kansas goes far in the tournament, I'll be stoked for the next 12 months, he says. After the team's win Friday night, he's BIRGing at least for now.
HBO chief Richard Plepler speaks in New York at a 2011 screening., HBO chief Richard Plepler speaks in New York at a 2011 screening., HBO CEO Richard Plepler is saying something a lot of the television network's fans have been waiting to hear that its content could be offered to customers directly through their Internet service providers instead of a cable company., Right now, HBO must be purchased through a cable provider. Plepler tells Reuters that HBO Go, an online streaming service launched by the network in 2010 (but still only available as an extra to your cable TV) might also be sold through ISPs., As Business Insider puts it, HBO, unlike Netflix, relies on cable companies for distribution. It doesn't want to upset its partners by going direct to the consumer., Customers could pay $50 a month for their broadband Internet and an extra $10 or $15 for HBO to be packaged in with that service, Plepler told the news agency., Maybe HBO GO, with our broadband partners, could evolve, Plepler says. We would have to make the math work., HBO Go has about 6.5 million registered users, compared with about 29 million for HBO's main service, Reuters says.
Federal Communications Commission Chairman Julius Genachowski testifies before a Senate committee in March of 2013., Federal Communications Commission Chairman Julius Genachowski testifies before a Senate committee in March of 2013., The chairman of the Federal Communication Commission announced during a staff meeting on Friday that he intends to step down in the coming weeks., Julius Genachowski's resignation comes just a day after Commissioner Robert McDowell announced his plans to step down., The New York Times reports the Obama administration has not settled on a replacement for Genachowski. It reports:, Both resignations had been widely expected since the re-election of President Obama, although the timing had been in doubt because of the chairman's desire not to leave the commission with a 2-to-2 split between Republicans and Democrats., Mr. Genachowski leaves a number of his highest priorities unfinished, if well under way. The F.C.C. is in the process of drawing up an ambitious plan to make additional high-value airwaves, or spectrum, available for sale to mobile phone companies for use in wireless broadband Internet service., Time Magazine has a bit of a retrospective on Genachowski's time at the FCC. He has been chairman since June of 2009:, Throughout his tenure, he has tried to thread a centrist needle on issues like broadband policy, industry competition, and media consolidation. In doing so, he has managed to annoy almost every constituency, from public interest groups that have pushed for a more activist FCC, to industry giants who have bristled at some of his decisions., For example, Genachowski's decision to approve Comcast's purchase of NBCUniversal dismayed media reform advocates. On the other side of the ledger, his rejection of AT&T;'s proposed purchase of T-Mobile infuriated AT&T; CEO Randall Stephenson. One might say that the fact that he's displeased two historically opposed forces public interest groups and industry titans suggests that he's actually done a relatively balanced job, but there is no doubt that he is not the most popular official in Washington, D.C.
Chicago Teachers Union President Karen Lewis speaks outside Mahalia Jackson Elementary School in Chicago about the planned closing of 54 public schools. Opponents say the plan will disproportionately affect minority students in the nation's third-largest school district., Chicago Teachers Union President Karen Lewis speaks outside Mahalia Jackson Elementary School in Chicago about the planned closing of 54 public schools. Opponents say the plan will disproportionately affect minority students in the nation's third-largest school district., In Chicago, officials have released a long-feared list that places more than 50 schools on the chopping block. The public school district faces a $1 billion shortfall, and the mayor says many of the city's school buildings are half empty. Some angry parents and teachers say the plan will harm children and they'll fight to keep the schools open., There were protests all day Thursday against the proposed school closings, including one outside the home of the Chicago school board president. At another later in the day, Tekeeva Thompson, a lunchroom attendant at a school on the list, implored the district not to close any schools., These children look at these schools as safe havens. They come from broken homes, some of them, and violence is a big issue. Closing these schools will separate them. They depend on each other as well as we depend on them, Thompson said., The district says it's closing 54 schools and programs in all; the actual buildings proposed for closure total about 60. They are overwhelmingly in black neighborhoods where there's been a big population decline in recent years. Schools spokeswoman Becky Carroll says they are also communities that have historically been underserved. She says the school closings will allow the district to combine resources by consolidating schools, and that students will get better educational opportunities., Juan Carlos Ordonez, 5, gets a hug from his mother at Chicago's Jean De Lafayette Elementary School, one of 54 schools slated for closure. Ordonez attends a special education program for students with autism or severe and profound disabilities. About 170 of Lafayette's 480 students are in the program., Juan Carlos Ordonez, 5, gets a hug from his mother at Chicago's Jean De Lafayette Elementary School, one of 54 schools slated for closure. Ordonez attends a special education program for students with autism or severe and profound disabilities. About 170 of Lafayette's 480 students are in the program., Whether it's libraries, computer science labs, even things like fresh coats of paint help to provide the kind of learning environment and support that kids need to be successful, Carroll says., Timothy Knowles, the head of the University of Chicago's Urban Education Institute, says he understands the rationale behind Chicago's move., There's no question about the economics here. Maintaining half-empty, century-old buildings doesn't make sense for cash-strapped cities and states, Knowles says., The school district says it will save $560 million over the next decade. But Knowles says no city in the country has made changes of this magnitude in one year. He says one of the biggest challenges for Chicago will be whether the children will go to better schools. Another is whether school closures will put children's safety at risk., Many of the schools are in high-crime areas where gang violence is common. While the school district plans to have community patrols to help students get to their new locations, the Rev. Paul Jakes says it will be dangerous for plenty of kids traveling through competing gang turf., We're coming to say that if any child's life is lost, that the blood of that child is on the hands of Mayor Rahm Emanuel, he says., Chicago's massive school closing announcement comes just weeks after Philadelphia voted to shut down more than 20 schools., Chicago Teachers Union President Karen Lewis, who led a strike early in the school year, says Emanuel should be ashamed., Closing 50 schools is an abomination, Lewis says. But for him Wall Street will be cheering, 'cause that's what they did about Philadelphia. This is not a game between mayors to see how many schools they can close. These are real children's lives., The union will rally against the proposed closures next week, and school board members will vote on them in May.
Print versions of Daily Variety, like this one from 2003, will no longer be available on L.A. newsstands. Variety will continue online and in a print weekly, but the daily print edition is being dropped., Print versions of Daily Variety, like this one from 2003, will no longer be available on L.A. newsstands. Variety will continue online and in a print weekly, but the daily print edition is being dropped., For eight decades, Daily Variety has been a Hollywood must-read for everyone from studio heads to actors looking for a big break. But the days of assistants running out to grab the trades are over: This week, the Los Angeles institution published its last daily edition., Daily Variety will continue online or on the info-pike, as the magazine would say in its distinctive slanguage and a print magazine will still appear on a weekly basis. The shift away from a daily reflects the fact that, like many other publications, Daily Variety has been buffeted by changing reader habits as well as major shifts in the industry it covers., Neil Gabler, a cultural historian at the University of Southern California's Norman Lear Center, joins NPR's Renee Montagne to explain the importance of Variety, decode some of its slang and explain how the world of Hollywood news has transformed., On why Daily Variety was so important in Hollywood, Well, first of all Daily Variety was itself a product of technological change. Variety began as a weekly in 1905, and it covered primarily Broadway and vaudeville. But as the motion picture industry became more important, in 1933 Variety decided that it need a Los Angeles edition and a daily edition that spoke primarily to the motion picture industry. And it became one of the two basic sources of news for the motion picture industry, the other being The Hollywood Reporter. Every day, virtually every executive, every author in fact every stagehand would get their copy of Daily Variety and thumb through it to see what films were being put into production, what the grosses were, what executive was being fired. This was the place that everyone in Hollywood went for information., On Daily Variety's unique lingo, In the early days of Variety, there were all sorts of 'slanguages' that were used by the pape, and that eventually crept its way into the Hollywood daily version as well. Things like 'boffo' when a picture was doing well; or, you know, a director never directed a film, he 'lensed' a movie. No one ever signed a contract they 'inked' a contract. These were the sorts of things that became legendary., On what led Variety to stop daily publication, and how Hollywood is reacting, The same thing, by the way, happened to The Hollywood Reporter, the chief rival of Variety. Several years back it also ceased its daily publication went to a weekly and went primarily online. But there's an old saying, that everybody has two businesses, his own business and show business. And I don't think that's ever been truer than over the past 20 years. You can find show business information everywhere. Once upon a time, if you wanted to know what a film grossed, you would have to go to Variety or to The Hollywood Reporter. There weren't grosses available anywhere else. Well now we all know that on Sunday night on our local news we get the film grosses for that weekend., I think there is sadness. ... I think there was this kind of ritual that almost everyone in Hollywood had gone through, where they'd grab their coffee and they'd grab their Daily Variety, and they'd sit there probably looking for their own names. ... But I think now that ritual is gone. That's all gone, and now it's going to be part of nostalgia rather than part of routine.
Gears of War: Judgment hit stores on Tuesday., This generation of video game consoles will be remembered for over-the-top, knock-you-out-of-your-seat extravaganza games like Halo, Call of Duty and Gears of War, a juggernaut of a game. The first three Gears of War sold 19 million units, making it a $1 billion franchise. And the latest, Gears of War: Judgment, has just hit stores at a crucial time in the video game industry sales are down, new Xbox and PlayStation consoles are due out, and mobile gaming is growing. In a lot of ways, what's happening with Gears of War is emblematic of what the industry as a whole is going through., Gears of War specifically, to me, is a game that defined the HD generation of gaming, says Phil Spencer, corporate vice president of Microsoft Studios, which publishes and develops games for the Xbox., According to industry analyst Billy Pidgeon, Gears of War may be the swan song for this particular type of gaming experience., It is one of a kind, he says. And it is over the top. And it's a great console game, no doubt about it. So in a way, it could be the last one of this generation., Ahead Of The Curve, Big changes are coming to the game industry. While the console market is still hugely profitable, recent declines have people buzzing about what the future may be. In 2008, retail sales of video games in the U.S. were $21 billion. Last year, that number dropped to $13 billion., According to Pidgeon, the console market has peaked. There's a lot of places that a hard-core gamer can go to get, you know, hard-core games, he says., That's a pretty radical thing to say. A smartphone or tablet is fine for Angry Birds, but surely an over-the-top game like Gears of War can't be replicated on something you carry in your pocket., That said, Gears' maker, Epic Games, is already placing its bets on mobile., I like to think that at each time we've released something big and new, it's kind of guided the industry to where things could be going, says Mark Rein, Epic Games' vice president and co-founder., Rein may not be modest, but he does have a point. Ten years ago, back when hard-core gamers were still on PCs, Epic made PC games. But when the Xbox 360 came out, Epic took a chance and used its PC game engine to make Gears of War for the Xbox. The company bet that the hard core would migrate to consoles, and that bet paid off to the tune of a billion dollars., There's Always Time For Video Games, Now, Epic is helping lure the hard core to smartphones and tablets. It created Infinity Blade for the iPhone and iPad with the same engine that made Gears of War. So far, it's earned about $56 million, which is a lot of money for a mobile game., Analyst Pidgeon points to another avenue companies like Epic and Xbox are using to make money., So I get Gears of War, he says, and I'm playing it ... and then a new map comes out. But that map isn't free; it's downloadable content, or DLC, as industry insiders call it. Pidgeon says hard-core players will easily spend an additional $60 on DLC on top of the $60 they've already put down for the game., Phil Spencer of Microsoft Studios says these changes have completely altered the way people like him think about the video game business., Fifteen, 20 years ago, we used to think about the launch [as] the end of a bunch of production and creative work, he says. Now your relationship really starts with the consumers when you launch the game., Spencer, for one, isn't too worried about the future, no matter how different it may be., People have always found time for entertainment, he says, time and money., So really, it's just a matter of figuring out how exactly and where exactly to best collect.
A home for sale in Glenview, Ill. Existing-home sales hit the highest level in more than 3 years in February. But not everyone is convinced that the housing sector's momentum has staying power., A home for sale in Glenview, Ill. Existing-home sales hit the highest level in more than 3 years in February. But not everyone is convinced that the housing sector's momentum has staying power., This week, optimists had no trouble finding fresh evidence to suggest that the housing market is recovering., On Thursday, they learned from a Realtors' report that existing home sales hit the highest level in more than 3 years. And earlier this week, a Commerce Department report showed homebuilding permits have been rising at the quickest pace since June 2008., But not everyone is convinced that the sector's momentum has staying power. Skeptics point to reasons why the housing sector might falter, just as it has several times over the past six years., If the optimists and pessimists had to face off in front of a judge, these are the exhibits they might enter as evidence:, The Optimists' Case, Your honor, don't be blinded by years of bad news. Look at these recent statistics:, Home prices rose by more than 7 percent last year, according to the widely respected S&P;/Case-Shiller Index., Builders have been hiring again, adding workers at a pace of 30,000 a month over the past five months., The Federal Reserve plans to hold interest rates at historically low levels for a long time, making homes more affordable., The number of underwater borrowers, i.e., those whose mortgages exceed the value of their homes, fell by almost 4 million last year to 7 million, according to JPMorgan Securities., Sales of existing homes and building permits are both rising. Realtors in a number of cities report bidding wars breaking out because too few homes are on the market. This latest Realtors' report showed sales were 10.2 percent above the same month last year, marking 20 straight months of gains., &mdash; The Realtors' report showed the inventory of homes for sale in February increased 9.6 percent to 1.94 million. That represented a 4.7-month supply of houses on the market, up from 4.3 months in January. Six months of inventory makes for a healthy market, so Realtors like the direction of that data., &mdash; Homes are getting bigger again. The median new single-family home shrank about 6 percent during the housing bust. But now, Commerce Department data show the median size of a new home started in 2012 hit a record 2,309 square feet, exceeding the previous high of 2,259 in 2006., Testifying for the optimists are Federal Reserve policymakers, who on Wednesday released an economic assessment confirming that the housing sector has strengthened further., And IHS Global Insight forecasters say they expect 2013 to be the best year for housing since 2007., The Pessimists' Case, Your honor, we'd like to call your attention to these disturbing facts:, The number of underwater homeowners may be down, but it's still extremely high, with an estimated one in five owing more than the home's worth. When people can't get out of their old mortgages, they can't move up to a nicer home., Home prices, on average, are still at very depressed levels still roughly 30 percent below their peak in many markets. That means millions of houses will remain underwater for a very long time, making it harder for people to trade up., Loans may be cheap, but only for people with sterling credit scores. With unemployment still so high at 7.7 percent and wages scarcely growing, millions of Americans can't qualify for home loans., Congress has just imposed sharp federal spending cuts, which could depress economic growth and drive unemployment back up, reducing the number of people who could buy homes., &mdash; The increased number of homes for sale in February may suggest that there really is a shadow inventory, a huge number of foreclosed houses that lenders are going to begin dumping onto the market now, driving prices back down., Testifying for the pessimists is Sheila Bair, former head of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. At a recent economic conference, she warned that with job and wage growth still so slow, the housing market could soon stumble. We need more experience and data to know if it's really turned around, she said., The jury will remain out at least until the crucial spring season moves into high gear. Late March through Memorial Day is the peak time for home shopping., For now, even many industry insiders don't seem to know exactly what to think about this housing market. On Monday, the National Association of Home Builders released its latest market index report, and it showed another drop in sentiment., More builders described industry conditions as bad than good, with the index falling to 44, down from December's post-recession peak of 47. The builders said they were being frustrated by their inability to get credit from their lenders and by rising costs.
There were 336,000 first-time claims for unemployment benefits last week, up 2,000 from the week before, the Employment and Training Administration reports., The big news here is that the 4-week moving average was 339,750, a drop from of 7,5000 from last week and the lowest level in 5 years., Bloomberg reports:, 'We've been surprised over the last few weeks as claims have continued to fall,' Sean Incremona, senior economist at 4Cast Inc. in New York, said before the report. Incremona projected 335,000 initial claims. 'There is definitely progress in the labor market, though mostly through a reduction in layoffs.', Estimates for first-time claims ranged from 325,000 to 352,000 in the Bloomberg survey of 47 economists. The prior week's applications were revised to a seven-week low of 334,000 after an initially reported 332,000., Update at 9:21 a.m. ET. Manufacturing Is Up:, The AP reports:, U.S. manufacturing growth quickened in March and the pace of hiring increased, suggesting the sector will contribute to stronger overall U.S. growth in the first quarter, an industry survey showed on Thursday. ..., Manufacturers stepped up hiring this month, driving the employment sub-index to 54.6 from 53.5 and rounding out the best three-month stretch for hiring in the sector since early last year, according to Markit chief economist Chris Williamson.
Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos unveils new Kindle reading devices at a press conference in 2012., Amazon CEO Jeff Bezos unveils new Kindle reading devices at a press conference in 2012., The daily lowdown on books, publishing, and the occasional author behaving badly.
The new Samsung Galaxy S4 has been the subject of buzz in the tech media., The new Samsung Galaxy S4 has been the subject of buzz in the tech media., Samsung has been on a roll. The hype surrounding its latest smartphone, the Galaxy S4, created a buzz in the tech media and chatter that Samsung was poised to eat Apple's lunch. But Samsung's long-term position in the smartphone market is more complicated., In August of last year, Samsung accomplished what once seemed almost impossible: Its top-of-the-line smartphone briefly outsold the iPhone. By this winter, the company was confident enough to buy a 2-minute-long Super Bowl commercial and not mention its arch rival even once., Just a few years ago, Samsung was one of more than a half-dozen big companies that were trying to break into the smartphone market by selling phones with Google's Android software., If Apple was Snow White, Samsung was one of Google's seven dwarfs. But today, all that has changed., They've done a phenomenal job sort of emerging from a pretty large set of handset makers to be the clear leader, says venture capitalist Chris Dixon of Andreessen Horowitz., Samsung sold more smartphones than any company in the world last year. The cash from this part of Samsung's business shot up by more than 50 percent in the last quarter alone. But Dixon doesn't buy into the idea that Apple is about to be unseated., The closest sort of analog to where Samsung is would be Dell, he says., Dixon says today the smartphone business reminds him a lot of what the PC industry looked like in the 1990s. Analyst Charles Golvin at Forrester Research sees the similarities, too., He says every time a new Android phone comes out, there are reviews about its CPU and the size of its display and how many pixels per inch and, you know, how big its camera sensor is, blah, blah, blah, and really ... it's boring., Who cares? What matters is what kinds of software and new experiences can you actually deliver to customers, Golvin says., And it's Google and Apple that are creating those new experiences. Those two companies control the software that powers most phones. Samsung runs Android; Dixon says these platforms also attract the majority of the users and developers, and get in sort of an increasingly strong position., Apple and Android have created a kind of virtuous cycle, making them more appealing and ever more dominant., But historically, Samsung makes hardware and market dynamics there are totally different. Samsung doesn't benefit from virtuous cycle. Instead, it's caught in a never-ending foot race., The prices are driven relentlessly down, and the quality relentlessly up, Dixon says, eventually to the point where consumers become indifferent to the differences among the different providers, and that leads to a commodity market., Although Samsung had its best quarter ever last year, the profit margin on each new smartphone it sells is slipping. Many analysts believe it's going to be increasingly difficult for Samsung to stand out from other phone makers, unless it can create its own distinctive software., Which is, by the way, why Samsung is significantly increasing their presence in Silicon Valley, Dixon says., Samsung is spending hundreds of millions building a new campus here, and it's recruiting new programming talents. When it unveiled its latest phone last week, the boldest innovations were not chipsets or a high-def screen. They were programs that could translate languages and edit photos in new, surprising ways., In short, Samsung's new phone was all about software.
Update at 2:03 p.m. ET. Rates Unchanged:, Following a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, the Federal Reserve said in a policy statement today that it is continuing with its highly accommodative stance of monetary policy., That means that it will stay the course with its aggressive stimulus, buying $85 billion of bonds a month., Information received since the Federal Open Market Committee met in January suggests a return to moderate economic growth following a pause late last year, the Federal Reserve said. Labor market conditions have shown signs of improvement in recent months but the unemployment rate remains elevated., The Fed decided to keep its overnight lending rate at near zero. It said it would keep it there as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6.5 percent., Update at 2:12 p.m. ET. Projections Remain Almost Unchanged:, The Federal Reserve also made few changes to the economic projections (pdf) it released in December., For example, it still sees GDP growing from 2.9 to 3.7 percent by 2015 and it still sees the unemployment rate hovering between 6.0 to 6.5 percent by 2015., The Fed did tweak its 2013 GDP projection. They now see economic expansion in 2013 at a rate of 2.3 percent to 2.8 percent. In December, they thought that growth would be 2.3 percent to 3.0 percent., Our Original Post Continues:, After the Federal Open Market Committee finishes its two-day meeting, they will issue a policy statement at 2 p.m. ET., The Wall Street Journal reports that they don't expect the Fed to change any of its policies. The economy continues to improve slowly and inflation is still in check, so expect the Fed continue its $85 billion monthly bond-buying stimulus., The New York Times also reports that the stock indices were up. The Times adds:, 'With the market up 10 percent for the year so far, if the Fed changes ever so slightly, the market could have a knee-jerk reaction here,' said Steve Goldman, principal at Goldman Management in Greenwich, Conn., 'But I don't think that will be the case,' he said. 'There are still concerns in the euro zone, and the domestic economy is decent but not as strong as we would want it to be.', The Fed will release its policy statement at 2 p.m. ET. Chairman Ben Bernanke will follow that up at 2:30 p.m. ET. with a press conference., The Fed will post its statement here., We'll update this post once those two things happen.
A company called ReDigi wants to be the used record store of the digital age. , Say you buy a textbook in another country, where textbooks are cheap. Then you bring the book back to the U.S. and sell it at a profit. Did you break the law?, No, you didn't. In a ruling that came down yesterday, the Supreme Court ruled in favor of a student who had his friends and relatives buy textbooks in Thailand which he later re-sold in the U.S. on eBay., The ruling was a key moment in something called the first sale doctrine, which says that, if you buy something that's copyrighted, you're allowed to sell or otherwise dispose of it without the permission of the copyright owner., The publishing industry was, not surprisingly, unhappy with the decision. The Association of American Publishers put out a statement that said:, The Court's interpretation of the 'first sale' provision of US copyright law will discourage the active export of US copyrighted works. It will also reduce the ability of educators and students in foreign countries to have access to US-produced educational materials, widely considered the world's gold standard., The ruling means you can't have the ghost of copyright following the object around and policing it, said Jason Schultz, a law professor at UC Berkeley who filed an amicus brief on behalf of the student. When I talked to him yesterday, he told me the case has important implications for interpreting first sale doctrine in the digital world., A literal case in point: If you buy a song off of iTunes, can you turn around and sell it to someone else?, There's a company called ReDigi that's basically a digital version of a used record store. You can sell them your old mp3s, and you can buy used mp3s that other people have sold., Capitol Records is suing ReDigi for copyright infringement. The complaint alleges that ReDigi makes and assists its users in making systematic, repeated and unauthorized reproductions and distributions of Plaintiffs copyrighted sound recordings., ReDigi says what it's doing is perfectly legal under the first sale doctrine., The company argues that you own the songs, and you should be able to resell them just like you can a physical CD. It says its technology can ensure compliance with copyright law, first by verifying that you legally own a song, and then by removing all traces of the song from your computer and synced devices once you decide to sell it., Yesterday's Supreme Court ruling only covers physical copies of copyrighted works, and its implications for digital resale are unclear. But Schultz says the ruling could sway the judge in the ReDigi case., The decision says first sale is really important and has always been part of law. I think it will push him to find a way for ReDigi to work, to find a way forward for them that copyright allows, Schultz said., Of course, Redigi isn't the only company planning for the new digital resale future. Both Apple and Amazon recently applied for patents which would allow users to resell digital content like e-books, music and movies to other users. According to the NY Times, both patents call for the seller to lose access to the file after the transfer has occurred., For more about the textbook case, check out this report from our colleague Nina Totenberg.
Patrick Bove, a homebuyer (and seller), and Redfin real estate agent Lynn Ikle look at a pamphlet at an open house in Towson, Md., Patrick Bove, a homebuyer (and seller), and Redfin real estate agent Lynn Ikle look at a pamphlet at an open house in Towson, Md., The first day of spring typically signals the high season for open houses and home sales., The season seems to have arrived early in some places where homebuying is already frenzied, and in many markets, the pendulum has swung from an excess of homes on the market a few years ago to a shortage., In Baltimore, Patrick and Britney Bove are fighting on two fronts, so to speak. On one hand, they're hosting an open house in the city's Hamilton neighborhood, and on the other, they're trying to find a house to buy. This is proving difficult, much harder than it was last summer when they casually sampled the market., There seemed to be a lot more houses on the market, Patrick Bove says. Everywhere we looked, every weekend, there was something cool. Now that we're finally looking, that's when the shortage has hit., There's a kind of mad quality to their search, and it's made worse by alerts they get to their phones from realty website Redfin every time a new listing posts. They'll even check them in the middle of the night, to the point, Patrick Bove says, where he sometimes doesn't recognize himself., Bove gets text alerts of new homes coming on the market., Bove gets text alerts of new homes coming on the market., The other day I was out shopping and I got an alert and I couldn't get Internet access in there, so I kind of started panicking, he says. I left all my stuff in the store and just went out the car. If I wait, it could sell. Sure enough that house sold in two or three days. It's completely changed the rhythm of my life., With so few homes on the market, he feels he's on constant alert. A notification he receives in the morning can already be off the market by the end of the day., Rochelle Walker, the real estate agent helping the Boves sell their home, says that mood has permeated the whole market., I, for example, had scheduled five showings for yesterday, and when I called to confirm, three of them were gone, Walker says. And that was in a 48-hour period. People are literally making offers inside the homes, because they know homes aren't sitting., Baltimore is far from being the hottest market in the country. In areas like San Francisco; Los Angeles; Austin, Texas; Seattle; and Washington, D.C., inventory is extremely low. But even in Baltimore, and specifically in the Towson area where the Boves really want to buy, inventory is down 47 percent from last year., This is not all good news. Part of the reason few houses are going up for sale is that about a fifth of all homes in the U.S. as well as in Baltimore are underwater, meaning the loan is bigger than what the house is worth. So a sizable number of homeowners can't afford to sell., Also, with few recent comparable sales, agents say some offers are falling through because the appraisal comes in below the sale price., With few options to choose from, Patrick Bove recently decided to check out an open house adjacent to his desired neighborhood., The open house was bustling as Bove and his agent, Lynn Ikle, ogled the expansive backyard and the mudroom. Ikle surveyed the room knowing that the house will be gone in day or two, she says. It's not uncommon for her clients to submit offers at 2 a.m., There's a panic feeling out there, she says. It's like McDonald's. They want to just order it, go around to the next window and pick it up., Outside, Bove barely left the house before he paused to call and update his wife., I want to tell you about the house I just saw. ... It's pretty nice. I think you should come see it, he says., Britney Bove loved the house and they made an offer, but they were outbid and they don't yet have an offer on their own house., Ah well, Patrick wrote in an email. The search continues.
Companies are licking their chops at the prospect of a wave of baby boomers leaving their jobs with trillions of dollars in 401(k)s and other savings accounts, so older Americans may find themselves bombarded with ads for annuities. And younger boomers, too, may be targeted, since many are helping their parents with investment decisions., Annuities are a $200-billion-a-year business for life insurance companies and financial institutions that sell them. They are a sort of private pension that people can buy for themselves to create regular income for after they retire. They are tax-deferred mutual-fund-like investments, there are no annual contribution limits, contributions can be made in a lump sum or over time, and the payouts can be immediate or deferred., The older you are when you invest the money, the more your annual payouts are, Kiplinger's Kimberly Lankford tells Morning Edition's Renee Montagne. Payout amounts also depend on how long they go on for. For example, to get the highest amount, payments stop when you die. It's possible to extend payouts out, say, 10 years after death to go to your beneficiary, but that will lower the annual amount. There are all these choices to make, Lankford says. (For more details on the different types of annuities available, click to hear the interview above.), Protect Your Retirement From These Investment Scams , Decoding An Annuity Is A Daunting Task , What Retirees Need to Know About 3 High-Cost Financial Products , As with any financial product, annuities or, rather, the salespeople who market them promise benefits like guaranteed payouts. But salespeople can make big commissions on annuities contracts, and the insurance companies that issue the contracts earn hefty fees. There have been abuses, and in the past, state regulators have fined insurers for putting investors into unsuitable annuities., Given the mind-boggling math involved with annuities, even a highly literate person will have trouble making a decision. Lankford has been writing about annuities for years, noting several red flags to watch out for:, Surrender fees. These are fees you pay to cancel an annuity contract or withdraw funds early. They are designed to encourage investors to stay in their contract. A typical surrender charge starts at 7 percent of the funds contributed to the contract or on withdrawals in the first year. The fee percentage could fall in subsequent years and can also remain for 10 years or more. If older seniors buy an annuity, these fees may still be in effect exactly when the investor needs to withdraw the money., Churning. This is when an annuities salesperson convinces an investor to switch contracts. Moving money from one annuity to another earns the salesperson additional commission. Sometimes it's OK to switch to another annuity with lower fees or different guarantees, but you need to be careful that the salesperson is not trying to get you to switch just for the commission., Buybacks. Currently, some insurance and financial companies are finding that the annuity contracts they sold many years ago have terms that are generous for investors but not good for the company's bottom line. So they are offering investors large sums to buy back contracts. Lankford warns investors in a recent article that in most cases, the extra payments will be a bad deal for seniors who own older annuities., Free lunch seminars. Investment seminars offering a free meal may be touted as educational, but they've been listed as a top threat to investors by the Securities and Exchange Commission and other regulatory groups. These seminars often target older adults and can include high-pressure tactics to buy products they may not need.
Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., questions Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke during a Senate hearing last month. Senators from both ends of the political spectrum argue that financial reforms are insufficient to protect taxpayers from potential risks posed by large banks., Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., questions Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke during a Senate hearing last month. Senators from both ends of the political spectrum argue that financial reforms are insufficient to protect taxpayers from potential risks posed by large banks., Amid Washington's dysfunction, one issue has united some liberal Democrats and conservative Republicans: a common concern that too big to fail is alive and well., Despite the Dodd-Frank financial reforms, these lawmakers believe the nation's largest banks still pose a threat to the economy and that the government will step in to bail them out if they get in trouble., At a recent hearing on Capitol Hill, Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass., confronted Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke with her concerns. We've now understood this problem for nearly five years, she said. So when are we going to get rid of too big to fail? Any idea when we're going to arrive in the right direction?, Bernanke pointed to Dodd-Frank's prohibition against government bailouts, the authority the law gives to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. to wind down the biggest banks and the added capital the law requires those banks have on hand to absorb potential losses., But the hearing's next questioner, Republican Sen. David Vitter of Louisiana, wouldn't drop the subject., My top concern is actually the same as Mrs. Warren's, he said. There is growing bipartisan concern across the whole political spectrum about the fact that too big to fail is alive and well., Left And Right Unite Around New Reforms, Vitter says the evidence is in the financial market. He says investors are willing to lend to the megabanks more cheaply than to smaller banks because they believe the government would bail out the big banks if they get in trouble despite Dodd-Frank., Vitter has teamed up with Sen. Sherrod Brown of Ohio, a liberal Democrat, to create a bill that would require the six biggest banks to have even more capital to cushion potential losses. The bill would also limit the big banks' access to the federal safety net FDIC insurance and cheap loans from the Fed., Brown is also pushing a bill that would curb the size of the megabanks by limiting how much they could borrow., They really are too big to manage, Brown says. The people running these banks don't understand the complexity, in many cases, of some of the derivatives with which they're involved. And that says to me that it's not just too big to fail, it's too big to manage., As proof, Brown points to JPMorgan Chase's $6 billion loss in 2012 stemming from disastrous financial bets made by its so-called London whale., To Some, 'No More Bailouts' Pledges Are 'Empty Words', But it's not just on Capitol Hill that there's worry that too big to fail lives on despite Dodd-Frank. There's concern within the Federal Reserve system, too. Harvey Rosenblum, an official at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, has worked with the bank's president, Richard Fisher, to develop an alternative plan., Rosenblum acknowledges that Dodd-Frank clearly states there will be no more bailouts. But those are empty words, he says. Right now all you have is, 'Oh, we're ... writing over 9,000 pages of regulations to make sure we don't have too big to fail anymore.' But nobody can follow regulations that that they don't understand., The Dallas Fed plan would limit the government safety net to the traditional commercial banking part of the megabanks, but not to their investment bank or securities units, for instance. Then, Rosenblum says, the plan would require that people doing business with those outside units sign a pledge acknowledging this simple fact. Signatories would be demonstrating, in effect, I understand that if this company loses money, I'm stuck. I get it, he says., That in and of itself would change the incentives enormously and would clarify where the safety net is and where it isn't, Rosenblum adds., For Some, Dodd-Frank Remains Best Tool, Former FDIC Chairman Sheila Bair agrees that the limits of the safety net must be made clearer she argued for just that in her book, Bull by the Horns. But Bair says that can be done within the Dodd-Frank framework. Those who wish to put a stake through the heart of too big to fail, she says, should recognize Dodd-Frank is the best tool for the job., Bair says she wishes lawmakers had pushed harder for these tougher measures back when Dodd-Frank was being debated, but reopening the legislation, she fears, would give Wall Street a chance to weaken the reforms., Once this gets opened up, you never know what Congress is gonna do, Bair says. So again, it's a healthy discussion, but let's try to use the tools we have now. And I think that will be faster, too, than trying to get Congress to do a bill.
People stand in line outside the U.S. Supreme Court on Monday., People stand in line outside the U.S. Supreme Court on Monday., The Supreme Court ruled on Tuesday that U.S. companies that make and sell products abroad cannot prevent those items from being resold in the U.S., The 6-3 decision likely worth billions, even trillions of dollars could have repercussions that extend from U.S. trade policy to local yard sales., The case involves a part of the copyright law that was aimed at so-called gray market goods. These are U.S. copyrighted products from textbooks to watches that are manufactured in other countries for sale there, then purchased and imported to the United States for discounted resale., Supap Kirtsaeng, a mathematics student from Thailand, discovered that some of his textbooks were being published and sold in Asia for less money. They were identical to the textbooks he used at Cornell and the University of Southern California, except that they were much cheaper and bore an inscription saying they could not be exported. He got his friends and family in Asia to send him many copies of the books, sold them on eBay and made about $100,000 profit., Needless to say, the publisher of the textbooks, John Wiley &amp; Sons, didn't like that one bit. It sued Kirtsaeng for copyright infringement and won in the lower courts. Kirtsaeng was ordered to pay $600,000 in damages., The lower courts ruled that Kirtsaeng had violated federal copyright law by importing the books without the permission of the copyright owner, publisher Wiley &amp; Sons. Kirtsaeng appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, contending that he was protected by a rule called the first sale doctrine, which says that once you buy a product, it is yours to do with as you please., On Tuesday he won in the high court. Writing for the court majority, Justice Stephen Breyer said that to impose geographic limits on the first sale doctrine would make no sense. He cited statistics from retailers indicating that $2.3 trillion worth of foreign goods were imported to the U.S. in 2011, and many of those products were subject to copyright protection when they were made., Automobiles, calculators, microwaves, tablets, personal computers all may contain copyrighted software programs or packaging, and many of these products are made abroad with the U.S. copyright holder's permission, Breyer observed. To forbid their importation unless the copyright owner agreed would mean, in essence, that a car owner whose GPS, radio or carburetor was made abroad could not freely resell his vehicle without the copyright owner's permission. Therefore, said the court, goods, once sold lawfully whether in the U.S. or elsewhere can now be resold in the U.S. without the copyright holder's permission., Dissenting were Justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Antonin Scalia and Anthony Kennedy. Writing for the three justices, Ginsburg said that the court majority was ignoring an explicit goal of the copyright laws to protect copyright owners against the unauthorized importation of low-priced, foreign-made copies of their copyrighted works., Justice Elena Kagan, in a concurring opinion joined by Justice Samuel Alito, seemed to address the dissent's concerns by noting that Congress is free to change the law if it thinks copyright holders need more protection against such import-and-resale schemes.
Perhaps not the moment when you want increased sheerness., Perhaps not the moment when you want increased sheerness., The buns ... er, puns ... seem endless:, Lululemon, the yoga and running clothier, concedes in a letter to its customers that some of the black luon women's bottoms it has been selling since early March aren't quite covering their guests the way they should., As Lululemon puts it, there's been some increased sheerness., Or, as Fashionista.com puts it, I See London, I See France: Lululemon Recalls See-Through Yoga Pants., Lululemon says it is working with its supplier to replace this fabric and [with] other manufacturers to replenish the affected core items as fast as we can. The original supplier, Eclat Textile of Taiwan, says it made the pants to Lululemon's specifications. The real gap, the company tells Reuters, may between Lululemon's expectations and reaction from the market., Lululemon, which assures customers that we want you to Down Dog and Crow with confidence, needs to get on top of this situation because of its potential effect on the company's bottom line. It is offering customers refunds and, according to The Wall Street Journal, the company said the incident would reduce its expected first-quarter sales to $333 million to $343 million, down from the $350 million to $355 million it had previously expected., The company's stock (Nasdaq trading symbol LULU) is also getting spanked. It has dropped more than 8 percent from above $68 a share at Monday's opening to about $62.50 as of late-morning Tuesday., And that's about as far as we can stretch this story. Feel free to crack wise in the comments thread.
A home under construction in Atlanta late last year. The housing sector is now one of the economy's bright spots., A home under construction in Atlanta late last year. The housing sector is now one of the economy's bright spots., Construction was begun on 0.8 percent more homes in February than in January, the Census Bureau and Department of Housing and Urban Development say. Their report is another in a series of signs in recent months that the housing sector's rebound continues., The number of housing starts was up 27.7 percent from February 2012., Bloomberg News adds that building permits climbed to the highest level in almost five years, adding to signs of progress in the housing market that's helping boost the economy. ... Confidence is being restored to the housing market as property values stabilize, the employment outlook brightens and mortgage rates hover around record lows.
Guillaume Rocheron, Bill Westenhofer, Erik-Jan De Boer and Donald R. Elliott at the 85th Annual Academy Awards in February. Rhythm &amp; Hues Studios, the company that produced the effects for winning film Life of Pi, recently declared bankruptcy., Hollywood studios are demanding more and more visual effects to make blockbuster films. But the artists who create this movie magic are protesting that they and their entire industry are in deep financial trouble. Even the most celebrated visual-effects companies face the risk of going under, and there are calls to revamp the way they do business., The visual-effects community is still buzzing about Oscars night, when Life of Pi won four Academy Awards, including one for visual effects. In accepting his award, visual-effects supervisor Bill Westenhofer tried to explain that the company that helped create the film, Rhythm &amp; Hues, had just declared bankruptcy. But the ominous theme song from Jaws drowned out the rest of Westenhofer's speech., Some saw the Jaws theme slap-down as an insult to the army of more than 600 visual-effects artists around the world who toiled for years to create Life of Pi's vivid, computer-generated Bengal tiger, orangutan and meerkats not to mention a living, heaving ocean., Rhythm &amp; Hues hopes to be rescued in today's court auction, even while the movie has earned nearly $600 million at the box office worldwide. The profits made by Hollywood studios rarely trickle down to the visual-effects companies., We're like a big mom-and-pop shop, so we can go to the edge of the cliff so many times when it comes to finances, says Lee Berger, president of Rhythm &amp; Hues' feature-films division in explaining the company's bankruptcy. But you can only go over once., Visual-effects artists say the business paradigm for their entire industry is flawed. Here's how it works: The six major movie studios contract with effects companies on a fixed fee model. That means there's a set price for creating shots for a movie, no matter how many months or years it takes, no matter how many changes the director asks for., So if a visual-effects company is asked to redo a sequence 80 times, they're eating the cost of those extra 79 tries, says Variety features editor David Cohen. Cohen says the visual-effects vendors end up losing money for their painstaking work, and don't even get a cut of the profits in the end., They don't really have any recourse, says Cohen, who has written about the visual-effects industry for 13 years. You can say, no, we're not going to do it anymore. This is the shot you asked for; pay me, buddy. But you'll never work again., Suraj Sharma as Pi in Ang Lee's Life of Pi. The film was widely praised for its stunning visual effects and realistic digital depictions of the animal characters that populate the film., Suraj Sharma as Pi in Ang Lee's Life of Pi. The film was widely praised for its stunning visual effects and realistic digital depictions of the animal characters that populate the film., David Rand, a senior visual-effects artist at Rhythm &amp; Hues, says part of the problem is that the creative teams are left to interpret vague assignments., We end up in this kind of spin cycle, trying to guess what the director will like, says Rand, just to have them say, 'No, that's not what I said. We want it like this now.' It'll go and go, and it starts to cost. And pretty soon you see the visual-effects shop is paying for the movie. ... And then we watch the movie go on to make hundreds of millions of dollars of profit., Rand says another problem is that Hollywood studios are constantly chasing tax subsidies offered by other countries. Visual-effects companies end up losing work to international firms, or have to cut their fees., To try to compete, Rhythm &amp; Hues opened production offices in Mumbai, Kuala Lumpur and Taiwan. But the company still had to lay off hundreds of artists in its L.A. studios. The Universal, Fox and Legendary studios, which refused to talk to NPR for this story, loaned Rhythm &amp; Hues $20 million to finish movies they contracted for. Now, the company is frantically trying to wrap up those projects., In a small, windowless office, Rand is at his computer, trying to perfect a sequence for the upcoming movie The Seventh Son. He says he's worked for five other visual-effects companies that folded with almost all of them still owing the artists money. Rand says a union for the artists and trade associations for the companies may be the solution., Rand and other visual artists protested on Hollywood Boulevard on Oscar night. They've also been posting green screens on social-media sites to show what movies would be like without visual effects. They're protesting grueling working conditions countless all-nighters with no overtime, no benefits or retirement plans., Visual-effects veteran Scott Ross says it's an often thankless, profitless pursuit., There are these incredible artists that are digital gypsies that fly around the world, Ross says. That really messes with their families. And they wind up working in sweatshop environments. And ultimately, the companies they work for are going out of business., Ross says that the business model has always been bad, and now it's even worse. In the 1980s, Ross ran Industrial Light and Magic, which did effects for the Star Wars, Indiana Jones and Terminator blockbusters. Ross also founded and was CEO of Digital Domain, responsible for effects on Titanic, among other movies. After Ross left Digital Domain, the company went bankrupt. It's now owned by a Chinese company., Ross says that in the past 30 years, the visual-effects business has grown into a global enterprise while still operating like a small cottage industry., I don't want to make studios out to be big bad ogres, because they're not, Ross says. They're just running a business, buying the best products for the least amount of money. Unfortunately, the visual-effects industry is not running a business. What it's been doing is saying, 'Oh, gosh, do I get to work on Star Wars? Gosh, I get to work on Avatar.' So the people that run these companies really are not business people., Rhythm &amp; Hues is now hoping for a new owner, which could possibly be a South Korean company that promised to continue operations.
Electronic Arts CEO John Riccitiello, seen here speaking at the E3 Expo in 2010, is stepping down, the company announced Monday., Electronic Arts CEO John Riccitiello, seen here speaking at the E3 Expo in 2010, is stepping down, the company announced Monday., Electronic Arts, the world's third-largest video game company, announced Monday that CEO John Riccitiello would be stepping down., Riccitiello, whose rocky six-year tenure saw a 60 percent drop in EA's stock price, according to the Wall Street Journal, said in his resignation letter that he leaves feeling that EA has never been in a better position as a company., He said his resignation, however, ultimately comes down to accountability for the company's financial situation:, My decision to leave EA is really all about my accountability for the shortcomings in our financial results this year. It currently looks like we will come in at the low end of, or slightly below, the financial guidance we issued to the Street, and we have fallen short of the internal operating plan we set one year ago. And for that, I am 100 percent accountable., Although not mentioned by Riccitiello, the recent launch disaster of the new SimCity game brought a wave of negative attention to EA. The City simulation franchise, which has historically been an offline, single-player game, was launched instead as an always-online game. The game's servers were overloaded at launch and many players were unable to play., The server issues and launch problems became such an issue that Amazon stopped selling the game for a time and warned customers that SimCity wasn't functioning., Another often-cited failure is Star Wars: The Old Republic, a game that was meant to be a flagship, massively multiplayer online game that would compete with Activision/Blizzard's World of Warcraft. The game cost an estimated $400 million in production and marketing, but last year it was forced to become free to play owing to a lack of subscribers., According to Forbes, this is just the latest criticism aimed at the company:, Fans constantly fault the company for unfriendly practices including intrusive DRM (the cause of the SimCity debacle) and questionable tactics with regards to microtransactions and DLC, which are sometimes felt as a type of gouging. It's true that most large gaming companies are experimenting with all of the above, but it's almost always EA that bears the brunt of such criticism from the press and fans, as they usually tend to provide the most significant examples., These criticisms of both EA and other large video game companies, as well as advances in distribution technology, have opened the door for more independent game developers to gain market share in the $25 billion video game industry., This will be the second time Riccitiello has left EA. He'd previously been president and chief operating officer from 1997 to 2004, during a time of tremendous growth for the company. While EA looks for a new CEO, Larry Probst, chairman and former CEO, will lead the company on an interim basis.
People queue to use an ATM outside of a Laiki Bank branch in Larnaca, Cyprus, on Saturday. Many rushed to cooperative banks after learning that the terms of a bailout deal with international lenders includes a one-time levy on bank deposits., People queue to use an ATM outside of a Laiki Bank branch in Larnaca, Cyprus, on Saturday. Many rushed to cooperative banks after learning that the terms of a bailout deal with international lenders includes a one-time levy on bank deposits., Cyprus has about as many residents as the Bronx. All Cypriot banks combined are smaller than the 30th-largest U.S. bank. So why is the country's financial system front-page news today?, The answer, in large part, comes down to two words: Deposit insurance. Deposit insurance is one of those boring-sounding finance terms that's central to the way the world works today. Everybody is freaking out over Cyprus because the country just called into question the sanctity of deposit insurance., Deposit insurance was invented because of a frightening fact. Even the most boring, safe, neighborhood bank is in a crazy, risky business. A bank takes money people put in checking and savings accounts money those people are allowed to withdraw at any time and lends it out to other people, who don't have to pay it back for 30 years., Yet most people assume their money is safe in the bank. They assume that somehow, even if a bank takes all the money in its checking accounts and lends it out to people who don't pay it back, the people with checking accounts will still be able to get their money., Astonishingly, for the past several decades, this assumption has proved true in the U.S. and throughout much of the developed world. That's thanks to deposit insurance. Banks pay for deposit insurance, but at its core it's basically the government promising that if the bank runs out of money, the government will step in, take over the bank, and make sure ordinary people with checking and savings accounts get their money back., There's a limit to how much deposit insurance covers. In the U.S., it's $250,000 per account. Anything over that, and you're on your own. Anything less than that, and you're good at least, you're good as long as the whole deposit-insurance system holds up., In Cyprus, deposit insurance covers accounts up to 100,000 euros. At least, it was supposed to. But this weekend, the country broke the fundamental promise of deposit insurance., As part of a bailout agreement with the EU, the government of Cyprus announced a plan to take 6.7 percent from every insured bank account, and 9.9 percent from accounts with more than 100,000 euros. (The plan has to be approved by the Cypriot parliament, and there are reports today that it's still in flux.), In other words, ordinary people who put their money in the bank are not going to get all of their money back. It would be like waking up, logging into your bank account, and seeing that a chunk of it had vanished., Under the deal, ordinary people in Cyprus are getting hosed. Ordinary people in other troubled EU countries may see what's happening in Cyprus and think, my money's not be safe in the bank. If this prompts Spaniards and Italians and Portuguese people to start pulling money out of their savings accounts, it could disrupt the whole European financial system (again)., Now, the banks in Cyprus are fundamentally different from the banks in most other European countries. Over the past several years, Cyprus became a sort of offshore banking haven, largely for Russians. Money laundering may have been involved. Tons of money flowed into Cypriot banks. Then the banks turned around and loaned a lot of that money to the Greek government and Greek businesses. So Cyprus wound up with a broken banking system that threatened to take the whole country down with it., There's a good chance that people in other European countries will see Cyprus as a one-off that doesn't have anything to do with the rest of the eurozone, and there won't be a run on Spanish or Italian or Portuguese banks. There's also a good chance that the deal will be modified to reduce or eliminate the hit to insured deposits., Still, the past few days have provided an unsettling, potentially dangerous reminder: When you put your money in the bank, there's no guarantee that you'll get it back.
Workers and labor organizers in New York City protest the alleged exploitation of students on J-1 summer work travel visas who worked at a Pennsylvania McDonald's, on Thursday., Workers and labor organizers in New York City protest the alleged exploitation of students on J-1 summer work travel visas who worked at a Pennsylvania McDonald's, on Thursday., A group of foreign college students who came to the U.S. on cultural work exchange visas in December have been protesting their working conditions at a McDonald's in Harrisburg, Pa. In the process, they've wading into a debate about guest workers in the U.S., The students include Jorge Rios, who says three months ago he eagerly did the legwork necessary to get a J-1 visa, used for student work exchange., I had to do a lot of paperwork back in my country to get the visa. I had to travel long distances because I don't live in the capital of Argentina, Buenos Aires, I live 14 hours away from there, he says., Rios borrowed much of the $3,000 it cost. When he arrived in the U.S., the experience wasn't what he was told to expect., He was escorted to a room in the basement of a house owned by family of the McDonald's franchise owner where he worked. He shared the tiny quarters with seven other students. Each of them got $300 deducted from their paychecks every month for rent far above market rates., We didn't have any privacy. We slept in bunk beds that were meant for children because they moved and squeaked, he says., Rios says the students were told they'd get 40 work hours per week. But they got only 25 and were told to remain on-call at all times. When they complained, Rios says, his employer threatened them with deportation and further reduced their work hours., Student Workers Organize, Earlier this month, after reading online about previous student-worker protests, Rios retaliated. The social communications major organized his 15 student co-workers and staged a strike. They have filed grievances with the U.S. Labor Department and State Department, and are requesting a meeting with McDonald's corporate management., According to the State Department, the J-1 visa, or Summer Work Travel Program, started after World War II to promote cultural diplomacy. Following allegations of abuse in recent years, the State Department curtailed the number of students permitted to come to the U.S. to about 90,000 a year, from a peak of about 150,000 a year., Robin Lerner, deputy assistant secretary in charge of exchange programs, says the instances of abuse are regrettable and rare., Most of the program is filled with wonderful placements, she says, and the students say what a wonderful time they had and the time they spent here in the United States will forever change their lives., Investigating The Claims, Lerner says reports of abuse are taken seriously. Companies licensed to administer the programs are sometimes disqualified. The State Department conducts spot checks of programs though it didn't visit the Harrisburg McDonald's. Now, the State Department says it is investigating Rios' claims., McDonald's said in an emailed statement that it is also investigating the case. Kevin Morgan, chief executive of GeoVisions, the company that is the State Department-licensed intermediary with the students, said in an email, we are collecting data, talking with people involved and investigating all aspects of this case., We don't want people to come here and have a negative experience, and then leave, Lerner says. I mean, to me that is the polar opposite of the reason why we have this program., The Debate Over Work Visas, But the McDonald's case taps into a broader ongoing debate about foreign temporary workers, over 1 million of whom come to the U.S. every year on various visas, including H-2A and H-2B visas. Agriculture and home health care businesses rely heavily on cheap imported labor. But businesses and unions are at odds over how many guest workers should be allowed, and how much to pay them., Saket Soni is president of the National Guestworker Alliance, a union that helped Rios organize. He says both student and guest workers often fall victim to exploitation., It's a massive problem, he says., Soni says many students like Rios go into debt to come here and then are coerced into hard labor or forced to live in destitute conditions., The problems with the J-1 visa are part of a bigger picture, which is that guest workers across the country are firstly exploited, and secondly used to undercut local workers and turn jobs into temporary and low-wage jobs, he says., Unexpected Lessons, In 2011, Ionut Bilan, a 24-year-old student in Romania, helped organize J-1 visa student-workers at a Hershey's chocolate warehouse. He says his experience in the U.S. doing hard labor taught him some unexpected lessons., I wanted to stand up for myself, and I wanted to get this situation fixed, he says. Because the McDonald's student-workers were inspired by his protest, it was well worth the effort, he says., Rios also says his stint has turned into a complex lesson about American society and politics., I think that our real cultural exchange started since we decided to get organized and expose this situation. Because we learned that, although we were going through that, most American people, they don't know this is going on, he says., Rios says he plans to return to Argentina next week.
Craft beers for sale in Chicago. Craft beer has about a 6 percent market share in the U.S. beer market, which is dominated by Anheuser-Busch InBev and MillerCoors., Craft beers for sale in Chicago. Craft beer has about a 6 percent market share in the U.S. beer market, which is dominated by Anheuser-Busch InBev and MillerCoors., America loves beer., In the U.S., we drink $200 billion worth of the hops-brewed libation annually. What many Americans might not know is that most domestic beer, 90 percent in fact, is dominated by just two companies: Anheuser-Busch InBev and MillerCoors., Innovators, however, are challenging that dominance in the form of craft beer breweries. Small mom-and-pop-style breweries or regional breweries now account for about 6 percent of domestic beer sales. That may seem like a small number, but it's been growing every year since the early 1990s, while big brewers' share is declining., There are now more small breweries than there were before Prohibition, when beer was largely a regional business., Why Craft Beer?, At Meridian Pint, a trendy D.C. bar and restaurant, you wouldn't even be able to order a Budweiser, Coors or something else from the big two., I try to have a nice mix of approachable craft beers, as well as exciting new stuff for people who have tried a lot of everyday beers, says Sam Fitz, the beer director for Meridian Pint. He's a Cicerone, which is like a sommelier for beer., Meridian Pint offers brands such as DC Brau, Flying Dog and Oxbow. Fitz says he prides himself on this kind of handpicked selection, but there are some brands he won't carry., I do not carry any beer that comes under the Miller or Coors or Bud labels, he says., That's just fine with his customers, like Landon Rordam, who says he isn't looking for those big names but instead tries to find something he hasn't tried before., Big Beer Vs. Craft Beer, Consolidation of the big brewers also worries the Justice Department, which recently blocked an attempt by Anheuser-Busch InBev to buy the 50 percent of Grupo Modelo it does not already own. The Mexican beer maker, the world's third-largest, owns Corona, Negra Modelo and other brands., Journalist Elizabeth Flock, who reported on the blocked merger and the beer market for U.S.News and World Report, says the Justice Department said AB-InBev, by buying Grupo Modelo, would effectively eliminate its competition., The problem for craft brewers, Flock tells Jacki Lyden, host of weekends on All Things Considered, is that those sorts of mergers make the fight against big beer companies even more difficult., Everyone wants to be on grocery store shelves at eye level, Flock says. Craft brewers say big beer is increasingly pushing them out of those prime spots., There's also the issue, Flock says, of what the Brewers Association calls crafty beers beers owned by big beer companies disguised as small craft beer. A common example is Blue Moon, a Belgian-style beer., A lot of people think that [Blue Moon] is a craft beer, but it is in fact owned by MillerCoors, she says., Craft brewers argue that this limits consumer choice, Flock says. For instance, if a bar stocks the top brands from a big brewer along with these crafty beers, consumers are essentially only buying from a single company., Not everyone agrees. Benj Steinman, an editor for Beer Marketer's Insights, a trade publication, says these so-called crafty beers might be helping the craft beer market., What Anheuser-Busch and Coors have done through Shock Top and Blue Moon is opened up a greater number of consumers to the universe of craft beers and their innovation, flavor and variety, says Steinman, a 30-year veteran of the beer business. They're sort of gateway beers., In other words, they are more accessible craft beers that might get you started wanting to taste other, more complex beers with notes of dark cherry or sassafras molasses., Julia Herz, the craft beer program director for the Brewers Association, says big beer should print its names on the bottles., What we've called for is a transparency of parent company ownership, and to put that on the beer label so the beer lover has a chance to know who's behind those brands, she says., Herz says branding matters to many beer drinkers, especially those who care about the brands they consume and who owns those companies., A lot of millennials are associating themselves with what they consume and what they hold in their hand, she says., The Question Of Cost, Craft beers are, without question, more expensive, which might make it harder for them to compete against the bigger brands., This is a very middle-class beverage, [a] working-class beverage, says Chris Thorne, a spokesman for the Beer Institute, the largest beer industry trade group. So what a lot of people are looking for is what's affordable., Thorne says fierce competition is nothing new in the beer business: It's been that way since the days of Fred Miller, Freddy Heineken, Adolph Coors and August Busch., These are names that are rooted in our heritage, in the beer-drinking culture in the U.S., and they never got a break, Thorne says. They competed with each other., Back at Meridian Pint, beer director Fitz shows off his 24 beer taps, all pouring high-end craft brews. He really doesn't want to lose that market share to beers pretending to be microbrews., It certainly is more expensive, but for what we're trying to do, we're trying to offer the highest-quality products that we can, he says, and that means buying from producers that use good ingredients and are innovative producers., In the bar, customer Rordam says even if he has sampled some upscale microbrews at $6, $7 or $8 a pint, those prices might eventually force him to go back down the ladder., After I've had like three or four microbrews, I'll think, 'Wow, that was $25 [or] $30, I should probably get a Bud Light now because this is getting ridiculous,' he says.
The vineyard at Round Pond Estate in Rutherford, Calif. Napa Valley is just one of wine-growing regions across the country., The vineyard at Round Pond Estate in Rutherford, Calif. Napa Valley is just one of wine-growing regions across the country., A curious shift has happened in global wine-drinking trends: Americans have overtaken the French and Italians, Europe's traditional lovers of the fruits of the vine, as the world's top wine market., And it's not just wine drinking that's taken off stateside: U.S. wine production is also on the rise., Back in the 1970s, there were about 400 wineries in America. Today, there are more than 7,000. And they're not just in locations like Napa, Calif.; Walla Walla, Wash.; and Willamette Valley, Ore. They're in places that are less familiar as wine regions: Texas, Ohio, Hawaii and even Alaska., I've had some stunning American wines, and I don't think anyone should think that American wine is necessarily inferior to, say, French or Italian, Jancis Robinson, a leading authority on wine, tells Weekend Edition host Scott Simon, Robinson is the co-author of American Wine: The Ultimate Companion to the Wines and Wineries of the United States. The book traces what she calls an American wine revolution that is kind of amazing, considering it was only 20 years ago that the industry was feeling threatened by Neo-Prohibitionists., But now, wine seems to be such a popular interest with a whole load of people particularly young people, Robinson says., That interest has even led to wineries sprouting up right in the middle of cities. Just ship in grapes from a nearby vineyard, and you've got a resource for city-dwellers to see how wine is made., While you may think your local wine can't possibly be as good as something imported, that's not necessarily the case, Robinson says., She says she's especially a fan of some wines produced around the Finger Lakes in New York. She's also found a very good copy of champagne from the Gruet family in New Mexico., Pretty much all countries that make wine make some good wine and some bad wine, says Robinson. Yes, it's true that the majority of the very, very, very finest wines I have ever had have been from France, but then, France makes more wine than everyone else most years., Because winters can be pretty harsh in the American interior, European grapevines are tricky to grow. But new varieties like Traminette were bred to survive the climate. Then there's the all-American Norton grape, discovered in Virginia and particularly popular in Missouri vineyards., It makes some really serious red wines, Robinson says. So you can have very respectable Missouri Norton that has not an ounce of influence of France or Italy in it.
Connecticut-based hedge fund CR Intrinsic Investors has agreed to pay more than $600 million to settle SEC charges that it participated in an insider trading scheme involving a clinical trial for an Alzheimer's drug, the Securities and Exchange Commission announced Friday., Also Friday, the SEC announced that another hedge fund firm Sigma Capital has agreed to pay nearly $14 million to settle charges that the firm engaged in insider trading based on nonpublic information obtained through one of its analysts., Both firms, The Wall Street Journal writes, are affiliates of [billionaire] Steven A. Cohen's embattled SAC Capital Advisors., Bloomberg News says that:, Cohen's SAC Capital will pay the entire settlement expenses, according to a person familiar with the firm who asked not to be named because the information is private. Stamford, Connecticut-based SAC, which manages $15 billion, has said it would indemnify clients against disgorgement of illegal profits and legal fees., The news service also writes that the SAC affiliates settled the SEC's claims without admitting or denying wrongdoing. Cohen has not been accused of any wrongdoing., The Journal adds that:, In the Intrinsic case, the SEC alleged that the affiliate traded on nonpublic information regarding the clinical trial of an Alzheimer's drug. Mathew Martoma, a former Intrinsic portfolio manager, is separately facing criminal charges related to the alleged trades and has denied wrongdoing., Charles Stillman, a lawyer for Martoma, tells Bloomberg that SAC's business decision to settle with the SEC in no way changes the fact that Mathew Martoma is an innocent man., The SEC's case against Sigma Capital alleged that the insider trading involved the quarterly earnings of Dell and Nvidia Corporation. The agency adds that the case was borne out of its ongoing investigation into expert networks and the trading activities of hedge funds [and] began last year with charges against several hedge fund managers and analysts including Jon Horvath, a former analyst at Sigma Capital. Horvath agreed to a settlement earlier this month in which he admitted liability.
Handles on a gas pump in Brooklyn., Handles on a gas pump in Brooklyn., Consumer prices jumped 0.7 percent in February from January, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reports. The increase was fueled by a 9.1 percent surge in gasoline prices. Gas prices alone accounted for about two-thirds of the overall rise, MarketWatch says., The 0.7 percent increase was the largest for any one month since June 2009. Economists think, though, that the upward pressure on inflation eased this month. As Bloomberg News writes, there has been a retreat in fuel expenses this month., Reuters says the news doesn't change the overall picture: Details of the report on Friday showed no sign of a pickup in inflation to trouble the Federal Reserve. ... Fed officials are likely to dismiss the gasoline-driven jump in price pressures as temporary when they meet next week to evaluate the economy., Update at 10:05 a.m. ET. One Measure Of Consumer Confidence Drops:, Consumer sentiment tumbled to its lowest since December 2011 in early March, hit by dissatisfaction with government economic policies and as fewer Americans expected to see improvements in growth or the labor market, a survey released on Friday showed. The Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan's preliminary reading on the overall index on consumer sentiment dropped to 71.8 from 77.6 in February, short of expectations for 78., Update at 9:50 a.m. ET. Industrial Production Rises:, The morning's other economic news includes word from the Federal Reserve, which says that industrial production increased 0.7 percent in February after having been unchanged in January. Bloomberg News says resilient consumer demand, increased capital spending and lean inventories are spurring the pace of work on assembly lines.
The Carnival Dream docked in St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands, in December 2010., The Carnival Dream docked in St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands, in December 2010., For the past month, management at Carnival Cruise Lines has been in a nearly constant state of damage control., In the past week alone, three of the cruise line's giant floating playgrounds have experienced embarrassing malfunctions that have at least inconvenienced, if not angered, many passengers., Here's the latest status report: On Saturday, Carnival Elation had to be escorted by tug because of a problem in its steering system. Since Wednesday, Carnival Dream has experienced power interruptions at the island of St. Maarten, stranding more than 4,000 passengers. And now, Carnival Legend is limping home to Tampa at reduced speed because of an issue with one of its propulsion units., All this, of course, follows by barely a month the so-called cruise from hell aboard the Carnival Triumph after an engine room fire left the vessel adrift in the Gulf of Mexico with 4,200 passengers aboard., Christopher Muller of Boston University's School of Hospitality tells CNN that the latest wave of issues at Carnival appear to be a management problem., They are doing something wrong with preventative maintenance, he says. Carnival has so many working ships that to say the fleet is in distress is maybe a little bit broad, but clearly something is not right., Carnival has blamed the problems aboard the Carnival Dream, docked in St. Maarten, on a malfunction that occurred in the ship's emergency diesel generator during a routine safety test., At no time did the ship lose power, and the ship's propulsion systems and primary power sources were not impacted, Carnival said on its website. However, for a period of time last night, there were interruptions to the elevators and restroom services. Toilets and elevators are currently working, and have been since about 12:30 a.m., On Friday, the cruise company announced that 12 commercial planes would take the Carnival Dream's 4,363 passengers back to Orlando the closest major airport., The Carnival Legend's problems, though at sea not in port, appear to be more in the way of an inconvenience. One of the ship's two Azipods, a directional propulsion unit, was experiencing an unspecified technical issue that has forced the ship to reduce its speed., Even before the latest problems, questions have been raised about the cruise industry in general and specifically Carnival, the largest line in the industry., Update at 11 a.m. ET: Carnival Lowers Earnings Forecast:, Carnival's share price is down 2.3 percent and the company says it expects net revenue yields to be flat this year, versus an earlier forecast that they would rise 1 percent to 2 percent, Reuters reports., The cruise line cites weakness in Europe and pricing promotions. But as the news agency notes: Carnival, which operates lines including Holland America, Costa and its namesake line, is grappling with a series of recent headline-grabbing mishaps involving its ships that have dented demand for its vacations.
Former Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner's new book promises to give us the inside dope about reaction to the financial crisis., Former Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner's new book promises to give us the inside dope about reaction to the financial crisis., The daily lowdown on books, publishing, and the occasional author behaving badly.
What's Wrong With Banking and What to Do About It, by Anat Admati and Martin Hellwig, Hardcover, 398 pages | purchase, More on this book:, At a hearing in Washington on March 6, Attorney General Eric Holder admitted to senators why it has been hard to go after big bank executives:, It does become difficult for us to prosecute them when we are hit with indications that if you do prosecute, if you do bring a criminal charge, it will have a negative impact on the national economy, perhaps even the world economy. And I think that is a function of the fact that some of these institutions have become too large., The comment might be startling in Washington: Regulators recently gave a thumbs-up to nearly all of the big banks, after testing their ability to withstand another crisis. But Holder's less-than optimistic remarks come as no surprise to Stanford finance professor Anat Admati. She's co-author of a new book called The Banker's New Clothes, and she shares Holder's concern about overly large banks., But Admati emphasizes another problem: how much debt banks have. Banks can borrow cheaply, thanks to government guarantees, so they load up on debt. Admati says that heavy reliance on borrowed funds makes the banking system dangerously fragile. She joins NPR's Renee Montagne to explain why banks borrow more than they should, how new regulations aren't tough enough and how less government support would lead to a stronger economy., On Eric Holder's claim that it's challenging to prosecute banks, He was saying that the banks are too large, but the issue is really: Why would there be this negative effect on the world economy if he prosecutes them? And that's because they would somehow fail, or get distressed. And why does that happen? That happens when you borrow too much. So it's not about 'too big to fail,' but it's about the likelihood of failing, which is the likelihood of being, somehow having difficulty paying your debt, just like homeowners might when they have very little down payment or equity in their house. And for other companies, we don't regulate how much they borrow, and yet they don't borrow very much not as much as banks even though we allow them to. And so the banks just like to borrow, but as they do that they put all of us at excessive risk and danger., On the problems of excessive borrowing and the use of complex financial instruments, Anat Admati is a professor of finance and economics at Stanford's Graduate School of Business., Anat Admati is a professor of finance and economics at Stanford's Graduate School of Business., It manifests itself in these instruments because they allow the banks to use all kinds of tricks to borrow more and to hide all the risk in borrowing that happens. And so they can manipulate the regulation and they can actually be riskier than they appear, and all of this is just living on the edge and not being prepared enough, with your own money, indeed, to various eventualities, to what might happen., On new regulations and banks' resistance to carrying more equity, So the requirements now, which the regulators will tell you are so tough, actually still allow the banks to use borrowed money for 97 percent of their investment and have just 3 percent equity, so even if it's a little bit, just a little bit more of a buffer, it's still not a healthy place to be. ..., If they find that they cannot live with much more equity, then we have to wonder about their business model and the viability of having such a banking system that possibly is quite bloated and is distorting the rest of the economy. If the only way they can live is on subsidized borrowing, then we have to be concerned about why that is., On what would make the banking system more stable, &ldquo; The banks that cannot raise new equity are showing us a great weakness. ... The time to take care of that is now, and not in a crisis., Well, I would definitely want to move to a system in which the banks have a lot more skin in the game, are funding themselves with a much healthier mix of debt and equity, and to transition to that system shouldn't take very long. The banks that cannot raise new equity are showing us a great weakness, and some banks might be too weak to exist, and the time to take care of that is now and not in a crisis. ..., I would like them to build up and maintain their ability to withstand losses through a much, much healthier range so that we deliver to the public a stable and healthy system that can make loans and that can do everything that we need it to do, and without being so distorted and dangerous., I think the banks should be made to be less dependent on supports. ... The government needs to make sure that they are safer on their own, because their support allows them to have better terms for borrowing, and that's unfair to the rest of the economy., Read an excerpt of The Bankers' New Clothes
Kenyon College is a liberal arts college in central Ohio., A bunch of private colleges have been in a financial aid arms race for years now, offering bigger and bigger merit scholarships to lure the best students., This is nice for the students who get big merit scholarships. But it's not so nice for everybody else. Colleges have to come up with the money for those merit scholarships somehow and they've done it in part, by jacking up tuition. (We did a story on this last year.), This is not a healthy situation if what we are trying to do is utilize the limited resources that we have to educate students, S. Georgia Nugent, president of Kenyon College, told me today., At a recent meeting of private college presidents where Nugent spoke, a document titled High tuition/high discount has no future was handed out. (High tuition/high discount basically means jack up tuition and offer more merit scholarships.), The document, which we learned about via the Chronicle of Higher Education, says in part:, We believe that a financial model based upon the traditional high tuition/high discount approach to fee setting is unsustainable, We believe that discounting has led to an allocation of financial aid resources that is neither efficient nor just and has contributed to the rising cost of higher education., We believe that merit financial aid as presently understood is in fact non-need financial aid, Nugent told me the document is a work in progress. But the problem is real and college officials feel it constantly., I can give you the example of a student who applied to Kenyon, who we evaluated to have no need based on the assets of the family, said Nugent. The family then wrote back to us to tell us they had four other offers from other schools offering aid from $10,000 to $40,000., She says Kenyon did not change its offer, but that bidding wars of merit aid like this are common., The victims of this shopping around, she says, are students who aren't offered merit scholarships, and who truly couldn't afford to attend the college without financial assistance., Getting college presidents to agree that the problem exists is easy. Getting them to do something about it is almost impossible., It's the prisoner's dilemma, Nugent says. Typically in conversations presidents will says 'Yes, I agree. I don't want to provide financial aid to families that don't need it. But I can't afford not to do this. If I don't this, the state university down the road will eat my lunch because they are doing it., Nugent herself has struggled to implement change at her own institution, Kenyon College. Just last year, the college announced several new scholarships for students regardless of financial need. The school newspaper reported that the college is financing the scholarships with money previously set aside for need-based financial aid., It would not have been my choice [to create these scholarships], but that is a result of the competitive admission landscape, Nugent says. You look at what is happening in your admission pool and you have to be responsive., Recently, Kenyon also started offering one other merit scholarship: The S. Georgia Nugent Award in Creative Writing. The name was the idea of the alumnus who donated money to fund the scholarship.
Abigail Moscaritolo holds up a recent fashion find on a haul video. The YouTube trend has become so popular that fashion retailers are approaching haulers to promote their products online., Before getting to her homework, Abigail Moscaritolo, 19, sits in her unadorned room and adjusts her webcam. With little effort, she spills about the cute things she bought last week: a lazy white tee, a couple of basic black tops, bohemian-like earrings., This was on sale for $20 with 70 percent off, so you do the math, she says, holding up an oversized shirt., She's making a haul video the YouTube equivalent of calling a best friend and gushing about a recent shopping spree. Trivial details are accepted and overexcitement is encouraged., I thought it'd be cool to give fashion inspiration to other people, says Moscaritolo, who constantly reassures her audience that she's not bragging about her finds., Making haul videos is a hobby for Abigail Moscaritolo. But for the most successful haulers, the pastime can garner lucrative arrangements with retailers., On the hauler totem pole, Moscaritolo is still at the very bottom. She started making the videos only recently after watching an army of successful haulers sweep YouTube in the past few years., But rookies like her are part of the reason why the fashion ritual keeps growing., Haul videos are big and they are growing, says Lisa Green, head of industry, fashion and luxury brands at Google. She says there are 700,000 haul videos on YouTube today, up from 150,000 in 2010. We saw more than 34,000 uploads happen just last month, and we've been seeing an increase in viewers on haul channels over time., Turning A Hobby Into Profit, It's fair to say that many of the haulers behind those rising numbers love to espouse beauty and fashion wisdom. But there's an added incentive to the videos: They can be pretty lucrative., For Caitlin Ellsworth, known as Glamourista16, hauling is a part-time job. When she started three years ago, her bouncy personality attracted not just tens of thousands of admiring fans, but lots of fashion retailers and they came bearing offers., I had no idea what to expect when the first company approached me, Ellsworth says. It was from a cosmetic company and they just said, 'Hey, I'd like to hear your feedback on this eye shadow, and it'd be awesome if you could feature it in a video.' , Caitlin Ellsworth, or Glamourista16, has relationships with more than 15 companies, including Seventeen Magazine and several YouTube beauty channels., Ellsworth now works regularly with more than 15 companies, including Seventeen Magazine and several YouTube beauty channels., There are many ways haulers partner with companies, Ellsworth says. Some review products from retailers that then pay them. Others receive commission on sales generated by videos that feature a company's product. In some cases, girls with corporate sponsors host contests to give away products., You can definitely make a lot, Ellsworth says. Some girls are making six figures. So, it can definitely be a good job., In every scenario, haulers are required under Federal Trade Commission guidelines to disclose in videos if they received free things., For me ... it's not an incentive to just get free products, says Ellsworth, who won't feature a product unless it's something she'd actually buy. I love trying new things and I think it's fun., Lately, she's been trying a lot of new things from the junior apparel company Windsor. Windsor doesn't pay Ellsworth, but it gives her license to pick out and keep a limited number of outfits that she'll feature in videos., Low-Investment Marketing, Evelyn Campos, Windsor's assistant manager for online and marketing, says the company started relying on haulers several years ago as a marketing tool during tough economic times. We needed a way to reach out to our customers without having a huge marketing budget, she says. And we felt this was right up our alley with our target demographic., Campos says the videos of the 20 haulers she works with garnered more than 5 million views last year. She doesn't want to disclose how much the company profits from haulers, but a Google study indicates that it's probably lucrative. Four out of 10 people who watch a haul video end up virtually or physically visiting whatever store is mentioned, according to the study., While that kind of following can benefit clothing companies, it's also huge for haulers like Ellsworth who have their eyes set on a big dream., I'm currently working on expanding my name and I definitely want to have my own beauty business, whether that be with makeup or fashion, Ellsworth says., Only a handful of the biggest haulers can say they made it to the fashion big leagues. Elle and Blair Fowler, sisters from Tennessee, stumbled into haul and beauty videos five years ago, and have since attracted millions of fans with their uniquely animated personalities. The pair have released a book, Beneath The Glitter, and have even launched a beauty product line., For years, we've been creating video blogs and we've tested literally every single beauty product out there, Blair Fowler said in a video launching their makeup line. So, we decided to take it upon ourselves to perfect our favorite products and colors., They are, after all, beauty gurus a title thousands of haulers aspire to.
How Authentic Customer Connections Drive Superior Results, by Bob Garfield and Doug Levy, Hardcover, 229 pages | purchase, More on this book:, Katie Fisher, a Progressive Insurance customer, was killed in a car accident in June 2010. Two years later, when her parents went to court to try to prove the other driver's negligence, Progressive stood against them., Fisher's brother blasted the company on his blog and the story went viral. Readers pinned the blame on Flo, the ever-cheerful spokesperson in ads the company had spent hundreds of millions of dollars on. Flo was forced into temporary exile while the company negotiated a settlement. , In Can't Buy Me Like: How Authentic Customer Connections Drive Superior Results, authors Bob Garfield and Doug Levy cite this case as one example of the shift from the consumer era to the relationship era, where companies can no longer control their image and need to create authentic connections in order to thrive., With the prevalence and reach of Twitter, Facebook and other social media sites, customers now hold the power., You shouldn't worry too much about promulgating corporate messages because nobody's paying attention to them anyway, Garfield tells NPR's Neal Conan., What you should be doing is fostering and cultivating actual conversations, shared experiences and relationships, actual flesh and blood, human relationships with the people who used to just be account numbers to you, he says. And in a digital world, that is not only possible, it's now more or less mandatory., Garfield, co-host of NPR's On the Media, talks about what works and what doesn't when companies try to connect with customers., On how the image of United Airlines was overtaken by a customer, United has been selling us that it's a rhapsodic experience, and everybody who flies United knows that is emphatically untrue. But when this video by a country music band called Sons of Maxwell went online telling the story of how Dave Carroll ... watched out the window of his plane while his multiple-thousand-dollar Taylor guitar was smashed into smithereens by United ground staff and how the airline treated him high-handedly afterward, that got 10 million views in about five minutes on YouTube., Why? Because everybody knows that 'Rhapsody in Blue' has nothing to with the United experience, and 'United Breaks Guitars' has everything to do with the United experience. You cannot dictate your image anymore., On how advertising to a television audience has changed, In one night in 1979, 40 million Americans watched one show. Now, let's say in April of 2012 ... the top five English-language broadcast networks among them ... only reached 25 million people. That's together, in the aggregate., And, by the way, when you factor in the DVR, which people are using to avoid the advertising, that means the advertisers of those networks got very, very little visibility. Nobody's paying attention., On the power of word-of-mouth messages, The survey data shows that it is categorically more believable than anything you put in your ads. But what's happened is the Internet and social media have supercharged word of mouth., It's kind of like Santa. He knows when you've been sleeping. He knows when you're awake. He knows when you've been bad or good, so, you know, fill in the blanks. ... It's obvious that people respond to kindness and goodness, and they understand when people are being real and when they're being phony or slimy or dishonest or disingenuous. ..., Bob Garfield is the co-host of NPR's On the Media and a former ad critic at Advertising Age magazine., Bob Garfield is the co-host of NPR's On the Media and a former ad critic at Advertising Age magazine., There are actual dollars and cents reasons to live your business life this way. Companies that behave in relationship-era ways spend a lot less on advertising because they don't have to, they are more profitable than other companies in their category, and their share prices in public markets are higher., On how companies can respond to customers who complain with social media, People say what they think, and they say what they think. And they say what they feel, even if what they feel is wrong. And they use social media and Internet forums to say so. ..., There's a number of things you can do. You can ignore, which I don't think is really smart, or you can engage them. ... You'll quickly discover when someone has a real beef, a real grievance, someone who can be educated versus someone who's just a troll., In the meantime, you get credit in social media, just as you would at a town meeting where someone's standing up at the microphone not by ignoring them but by engaging and finding out what their beef is, trying to deal with it and do the best you can., If people are persistently awful because they're wrong, well, that's one set of problems, but the rest of the audience kind of figures that out. If they're a problem because they're right, because there is something wrong with your product ... then you've gotten some intelligence that you need to have and to adjust your business, your product, your service, your customer service, whatever, accordingly., Read an excerpt of Can't Buy Me Like
The number of people filing first-time claims dropped by 10,000 last week from the week before, to 332,000, the Employment and Training Administration says., That means claims continue to run at their lowest pace since January 2008. They've now fallen for three straight weeks., In other economic news, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reports that wholesale prices jumped 0.7 percent in February. Behind the rise: A 7.2 percent spike in gasoline prices. Excluding food and energy costs, prices were up a more modest 0.2 percent., Bloomberg News notes that since February, the surge in energy costs has eased. And it adds that the pickup in wholesale costs is unlikely to be sustained as weak global markets in places such as Europe restrain demand for commodities.
Apple CEO Tim Cook has reportedly been ordered to testify for four hours in the U.S. government's case against the company., Apple CEO Tim Cook has reportedly been ordered to testify for four hours in the U.S. government's case against the company., The daily lowdown on books, publishing, and the occasional author behaving badly.
Most economists say the U.S. housing market is recovering at last. But one banking expert who grappled with the colossal housing bust during the Great Recession says it's too soon to celebrate., Despite a recent upturn in sales and prices, the housing market is still very weak, said Sheila Bair, who headed the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. from 2006 to 2011. Bair, speaking at a Washington economic summit organized by The Atlantic magazine, warned homeowners that we need more experience and data to know if it's really turned around., Bair said lenders may be sitting on huge numbers of foreclosed upon houses that have been held back from the market. As housing prices start to perk up, that hidden inventory may come flooding into the market - and pushing prices back down, she said., Moreover, millions of homeowners are under water, i.e., they still owe more on mortgages than they could get by selling their homes. As soon as they can sell at prices high enough to pay off old loans, they'll put their properties on the market&mdash; and again drive down prices, she said., And there could be another worry: prices for all sorts of assets may already be too high now because interest rates have been held too low for too long by the Federal Reserve, she said., The Fed policy makers have had good intentions, but their low-interest-rate efforts have not revived the economy., We are not getting new lending and new jobs out of this, Bair said. However, we do have the risk of asset bubbles developing... well, they've already developed, she said.
Google employees play chess at the company's Russian headquarters in Moscow. Experts say tech companies are using serendipitous interaction in their workplace design to promote idea sharing and communication between employees., Google employees play chess at the company's Russian headquarters in Moscow. Experts say tech companies are using serendipitous interaction in their workplace design to promote idea sharing and communication between employees., When Yahoo CEO Marissa Mayer decided to end full-time work-from-home arrangements at her company, a cultural firestorm ignited. But it was just the latest step in Mayer's effort to transform Yahoo's culture., When the company was founded in the 1990s, it was one of the most exciting places to work in Silicon Valley. Those days are over; Yahoo has fallen woefully behind in the talent wars and now is trying to catch up., When you walk through Google's Mountain View, Calif., campus during lunchtime, it can feel a little bit like you're taking a college tour on a pleasant day., There are folks playing beach volleyball in a sand pit outside the cafeteria. There are soccer games across the street even a pick-up Frisbee game., And while the free food inside the cafeteria is a lot nicer than the fare at most universities, the tables might take you back. Actually, the tables' length and design look like those in high school cafeterias., Why? Because when you put them back-to-back, people walk down between the chairs, they bump into each other it's actually called a 'Google bump' and you go, 'Hey!' and you sit down and talk, says John Sullivan, a management professor at San Francisco State University and workplace consultant., He says none of this is by accident; it's called serendipitous interaction and it's all by design., Google has spent a lot of time studying what makes workplaces innovative and casual interactions are important. Sullivan lists three factors to make that set companies apart: learning by interaction, collaborations and fun. Most people just don't get that, he says., The volleyball and Frisbee even the length of the lines inside the cafeteria are designed to make sure Google employees talk to others they don't necessarily work with., Sullivan says they even measure the length of the cafeteria line. Why? Because if there is no line you won't talk to anyone, you won't interact, he says., By most accounts, this approach has been phenomenally successful. Google is ranked by Fortune magazine as the best place to work in the country. It attracts some of the brightest minds and earns close to $1 million in revenue for every single person it employs., So Sullivan says it's no surprise Google's data-driven approach to managing its workplace has attracted imitators, including Facebook., Google and Facebook are metrics machines, he says. So if you ask them what's the average time for a promotion, what's the percentage of women being promoted, they have it to a dime., Facebook has a slightly different feel than Google. It celebrates hackers and pushes employees to move fast and break things., It poaches engineers from places like Google by promising them the chance to push code to the site on their first week and letting them pick new jobs for themselves just after a few months., When you start to see the best people migrating from one company to the next, it means then, that next wave is starting, Mayer, Yahoo's CEO, told an overflow crowd at this year's World Economic Forum in Davos., I believe that really strong companies all have very strong cultures, she said., Facebook emphasizes freedom and so does Google, but both companies keep employees talking to each other. And it's no accident that when Facebook was looking for a chief operating officer it hired a former Google employee, Sheryl Sandberg., Or last year, when Yahoo went searching for new a CEO, it took a similar tact., Fundamentally, technology companies live and die by talent, Mayer said., For years, talent has been flowing out of Yahoo, not into it. Mayer is trying to turn that around with free food and phones. She's also personally reviewing most recruiting decisions., Part of that was because I wanted to make sure that Yahoo was absolutely the best place to work and that people really wanted to come and work there, she said., While Yahoo has been slammed for what many saw as a tin-eared condemnation of telecommuting, some within the company argue that it's now infamous memo was really just part of a larger effort to energize Yahoo's culture and competitive spirit.
American Apparel boasts that all of its products are made in the USA, primarily at its Los Angeles headquarters. Selling garments produced largely by machine, rather than by hand, has helped the company remain profitable., In the world of fast fashion, two U.S.-based companies loom large: Forever 21 and American Apparel. Both are based in Los Angeles, but the two could not be more different., American Apparel proudly boasts that the clothes it sells are made in the USA. In contrast, Forever 21 subcontracts with factories all over the world., Dov Charney, American Apparel's Canadian-American founder and CEO, has a reputation. I knew from a very early age in elementary school that I was going to rub some people the wrong way, he says., His company's models are often close to naked in ads at bus stops and in magazines. He has faced a variety of harassment suits, sexual and otherwise, and has had some serious trouble with Immigration and Customs Enforcement. Charney, 44, claims irregularities with worker documents once forced him to lay off more than one-third of his staff., Do Won Chang, founder and CEO of Forever 21, is 58, Korean-American and devoutly Christian. Every Forever 21 shopping bag is stamped with the Bible verse John 3:16., Chang has also had his share of legal trouble. There have been waves of worker disputes over labor conditions that lasted years at a time and even boycotts. Chang has also been charged with design theft for stealing styles from other designers., In an interview with CNN, Chang said he really had no interest in fashion; he just wanted to make money. And he has done a good job of that; relying heavily on manufacturing overseas, Chang projects $4 billion in sales this year., &ldquo; If American Apparel was not made in U.S.A., we would not exist today. ... It doesn't make sense to drive to Vietnam to pick up a T-shirt., - Dov Charney, founder and CEO, American Apparel, In contrast, American Apparel expects its 2013 sales to weigh in at around $650 million and this is expected to be a very good year., Meeting Demand Direct From An L.A. Factory, Perhaps Chang is just a more successful businessman, but it's hard to resist the question: Does it actually make sense, financially, to make clothes in the United States?, If American Apparel was not made in U.S.A., we would not exist today, says Charney. He doesn't pretend to be Forever 21, but he has built and run a successful business, starting with T-shirts., It doesn't make sense to drive to Vietnam to pick up a T-shirt, Charney says. By boat, it takes at least a month to get T-shirts shipped in., For Charney, that's too long. So instead, he drives to the seven-story American Apparel headquarters in downtown Los Angeles. From his top-floor office, Charney and his staff figure out what's selling well and quickly, then fill in the sewing managers one floor below., The quick process means the company's supply has a much better chance of matching demand. The American Apparel factory is so nimble, it can get 1,000 T-shirts out the door in a single day., Back at Forever 21, Linda Chang, the daughter of Forever 21's Do Won Chang, says she speaks for her father when she applauds American Apparel's vertical integration economic speak for doing everything in-house. But Forever 21 is different, she says., Its prices are even lower than American Apparel's, she notes, and the company offers a wider range of garments and styles. And we use a combination of overseas and local factories to deliver this to our customers, she adds., So, why can offering a variety of garments inexpensively only be achieved by manufacturing overseas?, Making Money By Making Knits, Frank Bober, CEO of Stylesight, which keeps fashion companies abreast of trends, says it's all about the type of product the companies are selling. Bober has been in the industry a long time long enough to know the difference between knitwear (T-shirts, leggings and sweatshirts) and wovens (dress shirts, blazers and jeans)., And knits, he says, are the key to making money by producing stateside. Knitwear is the only area, because it's so machine-driven, that can actually still be made profitably in the U.S., Bober says., Back at the American Apparel factory, you can see why. Knitwear for T-shirts comes off the machine in tubes, rather than flat bolts. You'll see if you look at our T-shirts, a lot of them don't have a seam, or they only have one seam, says Emily Nerad, the American Apparel tour guide. It's because that fabric is already in a tube. And then the sleeves and the finishing are sewed on., The company's secret to profitability is simply more knitwear, meaning more machines, fewer hands. American Apparel can turn out its 1,000 T-shirts a day because it takes less work than other types of garments., American Apparel can make a maximum of only 100 dress shirts a day and subcontracts out for its sweaters. And it used to make women's blazers but stopped. When you start to get into a women's blazer or a full fashion women's cashmere sweater, you just don't have the hands, Bober says., Made In America ... And Jakarta?, But Charney is currently expanding his American Apparel product line. I've already proven that that's possible, he says. Charney has plans for made-in-the-USA military uniforms, doctors' scrubs and hospital gowns, and he has a brand new, $5 million warehouse with plans to fill it., There could be some products that could be made elsewhere, anywhere in the world, Charney says. And it may come a time when my view of America may include Mexico City or Tokyo or Beijing or Jakarta., That might be one way to do it, but Charney's view of America is likely a lot more flexible than his customers' views.
Retail sales rose an estimated 1.1 percent in February from January and were up 4.6 percent from February 2012, the Census Bureau says., Kathy Bostjancic director of macroeconomic analysis at the The Conference Board research group, says in an analysis sent to reporters that the report's a sign that consumer spending remains relatively robust. And since consumers buy about 70 percent of all goods and services, their willingness to spend is a key economic driver., Bloomberg News notes that the rise in February was the most in five months and was more than forecast., It's a positive indicator that consumers are adjusting to the higher payroll taxes and higher gasoline prices, Russell Price, senior economist at Ameriprise Financial Inc. in Detroit, tells Bloomberg. People are encouraged by the employment gains we've seen.
Chanel Reynolds, shown here with her children Gabriel (center) and Lyric, started an estate planning website to help others get their affairs in order., Chanel Reynolds, shown here with her children Gabriel (center) and Lyric, started an estate planning website to help others get their affairs in order., Here are some of the key documents that Chanel Reynolds suggests getting in order sooner rather than later., There are also other details to compile and make accessible to those handling your affairs:, (The website is based on Reynolds' experiences, and includes a disclaimer that it is for informational purposes only and does not constitute legal, tax or financial planning advice.), Estate planning may seem like a pain, but imagine the mess you leave to those managing your affairs if you don't draw up a will or get life insurance., It takes really just a few hours now, rather than a pile of hours and thousands of dollars to do it later when you really need it done, says Chanel Reynolds, who created a website geared to help people get their affairs in order., The Seattle mother of two launched the bluntly written, one-stop estate planning site after her husband was fatally injured in a biking accident. On top of grief, she faced stress and costs because there was no will or any of the other legal documents needed to handle a loved one's assets., I really wanted to be focusing on what the doctors were saying and taking care of my children when instead I was just overwhelmed by this pile of questions about legal stuff and finances and probate courts, and it was occasionally the thing that would just put me over the edge, Reynolds tells Morning Edition host Renee Montagne., Her site which is a NSFW riff on get your stuff together features a checklist and templates for some key documents, including a will, living will and power of attorney. It also suggests compiling online account usernames and passwords and putting these key documents in a safe or scanning and uploading them to a password-protected site., Reynolds also suggests setting aside emotional items like photos of yourself, so that when you're gone people can touch them and hold them and feel them and remember you as well., For wills, Reynolds notes that lawyers can help, but there are also affordable online software options. I didn't realize that creating a will, you don't need a lawyer to do it for you, she says. In most states you need two witnesses and/or someone to notarize it. And it can save your family weeks and weeks and hundreds of hours of pain and confusion and legal costs that you probably can't afford., She suggests that baby boomers, especially, prepare the documents so others won't have to., It is really hard to go clean up after someone, Reynolds says, so not only do we need to take of this for ourselves, we have to really start thinking about having the conversation with our parents, these boomers, because otherwise we're the ones going out there and taking care of it for them.
Clothing chains like H&M; (above) and Forever 21 design and distribute new styles so quickly and cheaply, they've been dubbed fast fashion retailers., Clothing chains like H&M; (above) and Forever 21 design and distribute new styles so quickly and cheaply, they've been dubbed fast fashion retailers., When she got out of college and moved to New York, Elizabeth Cline liked to shop at vintage-clothing stores. They were the kinds of places tucked away on side streets in Manhattan and Brooklyn, where a lot of hunting and a little luck might reward you with a great, inexpensive cocktail dress that no one else had., Then she discovered the world of fast fashion chains like Forever 21, H&M; and Zara and it redefined her whole notion of bargain shopping., The products are very, very cheap, says Cline, author of Overdressed: The Shockingly High Cost of Cheap Fashion. The design is pretty attractive. And if you walk into the store, I think, for a lot of consumers, it's virtually impossible to walk out empty-handed., &ldquo; You see some products and it's just garbage. It's just crap, and you sort of fold it up and you think, yeah, you're going to wear it Saturday night to your party and then it's literally going to fall apart., - Simon Collins, dean of fashion, Parsons The New School for Design, 'Selling An Ocean Of Clothing', Over time, Cline had amassed 354 items of clothing, some of which she never wore. And such excesses aren't all that unusual, she notes. Chains like H&M; are constantly turning over their merchandise, introducing ever-trendier clothing and feeding their customers' desire for novelty., We want to surprise the customers, says Margareta van den Bosch, the company's hugely influential style adviser. We want to have something exciting. And if it's all the time hanging the same things there, it is not so exciting, I think., Much of H&M;'s clothing is so inexpensive a $10 leopard-print top or a $15 sweater, for example that consumers can afford to buy it in quantities that wouldn't have begun to fit in our grandparents' armoires. It's so cheap that it isn't even worth returning if we get home and decide we don't like it, Cline says., But despite the low prices, fast fashion chains can be enormously profitable. Sales at H&M;'s parent company rose by 11 percent in 2012. Its chairman and largest shareholder, Stefan Persson, is the 17th richest person on the planet, with a net worth of $26.3 billion, according to Bloomberg. Amancio Ortega, founder of Zara, another highly successful chain, is the third richest, worth $58.3 billion., How can these stores make so much money selling $10 shirts? Mostly because of volume., A store like H&M; produces hundreds of millions of garments per year, Cline says. They put a small markup on the clothes and earn their profit out of selling an ocean of clothing. H&M; has 2,800 stores in 48 markets and it's growing fast, especially in China and the United States, according to the company's website., Prices at stores like Forever 21 are so low, it's virtually impossible to walk out empty-handed, says Elizabeth Cline, who writes about fast fashion., Prices at stores like Forever 21 are so low, it's virtually impossible to walk out empty-handed, says Elizabeth Cline, who writes about fast fashion., The success of chains like H&M; and Forever 21 represents a paradigm shift in the retail world, one that has affected every corner of the industry., In the 1960s, people generally bought their clothing from large retailers like department stores, which in turn bought from manufacturers. But in the 1970s, retailers began to manufacture clothing themselves, giving them direct control over the manufacturing and distribution process., Among the pioneers of the change was Les Wexner, founder of the Ohio-based women's clothing chain The Limited, says Frank Bober, CEO of Stylesight, a company that helps retailers and designers spot trends., He was the guy that recognized that, 'Hey, I can do this myself. I can understand what my clients want, what my customer wants, and then I can go make that for them. I don't need to go to a bunch of manufacturers to do that,' Bober says., The End Of The Two-Season Shopping Calendar, Meanwhile, computer technology transformed the entire process, enabling retailers to design, manufacture and ship products much faster and more efficiently. At one time, the fashion industry worked around a two-season calendar that unfolded at a predictable pace., I remember my mother would take me shopping in August for the fall, and I would just be dying, putting on these itchy sweaters when it was 90 degrees outside, recalls Sharon Graubard, Stylesight's design director. Nobody does that anymore., A relentless drive for speed now characterizes the industry. Chains like Zara are so fast, they can design, manufacture and get clothing onto store shelves in a month. Customers can now easily see the latest fashions online and have become conditioned to expect a constant stream of trendy new styles from retailers., This focus on speed has affected every kind of retailer, even those not generally considered fast fashion., What that has done is made the industry move faster and work faster and have to produce more product, says Ed Filipowski, president of KCD, a public relations firm that represents some of the biggest and best-known brands in fashion. It's created a sort of year-round calendar for fashion as opposed to a biannual calendar for fashion. It's made our job a lot harder and it's made creativity a constant challenge., But now that retailers have whetted customers' demand for novelty, they have to keep their products affordable a big challenge. That means manufacturing in low-wage countries like China, but it also means using cheap, synthetic materials and rudimentary manufacturing processes., The simple fact is that much fast fashion doesn't survive more than a few washings. Simon Collins, dean of fashion at Parsons The New School for Design, likes the way fast fashion has brought a level of style to the masses, but he laments how poorly made it can be., You see some products and it's just garbage. It's just crap, he says. And you sort of fold it up and you think, yeah, you're going to wear it Saturday night to your party and then it's literally going to fall apart., Author Elizabeth Cline remembers buying a shirt at Old Navy, a chain she used to frequent. I had this tank top that had two flowers, kind of like on the strap, and ... after I started writing the book, I just started looking at my clothes, and the flowers were actually affixed with some sort of tape. They weren't even sewn on., 'Landfill Fashion', Poor quality has turned the fast fashion label into something of a pejorative, so much so that chains like Uniqlo and H&M; now reject the term altogether., And the chains have other image problems as well. Cline says there's a growing public consensus that the mass production of so much cheap clothing is an enormous waste of resources such as fuel and water. While many people donate their clothing to charities and consignment shops, fast fashion tends to be so cheaply made that no one wants to buy it, she notes. Instead, it gets recycled into industrial rags and insulation, or even thrown out altogether generating the term landfill fashion., The fast fashion model may be cracking in other ways, too. Factory workers in China, where a lot of clothing is manufactured, are increasingly pressing for higher wages., Companies have responded by moving production into places where wages are even lower, like Bangladesh. But such countries lack the sophisticated manufacturing infrastructure of China, and in the rush to fill the void, tragedy has sometimes ensued. A fire at a clothing factory on the outskirts of the capital, Dhaka, killed 112 people in November., The industry will no doubt adapt over time, but the days when fashion gets faster and cheaper every year are probably at an end.
The housing market is recovering. Prices are rising, the number of foreclosures is falling, and construction crews are finally starting to build again. But in one key way, housing remains in crisis mode: The U.S. housing market is still a ward of the state., The vast majority of new mortgages $1.6 trillion out of a total of $1.9 trillion last year alone are guaranteed by the federal government. If a borrower defaults on a guaranteed loan, taxpayers are on the hook., Source: Data Courtesy Inside Mortgage Finance, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, This is one of those semi-hidden subsidies that distort the economy and can leave taxpayers with a huge bill if there's another big downturn. It was supposed to be temporary, something that would be unwound once the crisis ended. But more than four years since crisis peaked, there's no clear plan to get the government out of the business of guaranteeing America's mortgages., The government has always backed some mortgages to make it easier for people like veterans and low-income, first-time home buyers to get into the housing market. But during the crisis, the government's role exploded., Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, private companies that guarantee mortgages, collapsed and were taken over by the government. Then, as private lenders pulled out and the market collapsed, the government increased the size of the loans guaranteed by Fannie and Freddie and other government programs. As a result, the government now guarantees almost the entire mortgage market., Last week, the agency that oversees Fannie and Freddie said certain operations of the two firms would be consolidaded. This apparently boring, technical announcement got a fair bit of news coverage, which made me wonder if I was missing something. I called Guy Cecala, publisher of Inside Mortgage Finance, to ask if this was a bigger deal than it seemed. It wasn't., It's just that there hasn't been anything concrete in the last five years of discussing Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and the housing market, he told me. So we get excited about something as small as this., Cecala said the housing market is healthy enough to support more substantive steps, including lowering the cap on loans guaranteed by the government. The government currently guarantees some mortgages over $700,000, which, at 14 times the median household income, is far more than most middle class families can afford., There's plenty of private capital to come in now and pick up the slack, Cecala said. But, as always, legislators are wary of doing anything that threatens home prices. No one wants to be accused of killing the recovery in the housing market, he said.
Women, Work, and the Will to Lead, by Sheryl Sandberg, Hardcover, 228 pages | purchase, More on this book:, Of all the posters plastered around Facebook's Silicon Valley headquarters Move Fast and Break Things, Done Is Better Than Perfect and Fail Harder Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg has a favorite: What Would You Do If You Weren't Afraid?, [It's] something that I think is really important and I think very motivating, Sandberg tells NPR's Renee Montagne. ... I wrote in my book, what I would do if I wasn't afraid is, I would speak out more on behalf of women., That book Lean In: Women, Work, and the Will to Lead is something of a feminist call to arms. In it, Sandberg, a 43-year-old former Google executive with two Harvard degrees, is calling on other women, as she puts it, to lean in and embrace success. And it has struck a chord. In the weeks leading up to the book's publication on Monday, Sandberg, who has not been known to court controversy in the past, has been the subject of critical op-eds and cranky commentaries., Sandberg is no stranger to success. Back in 2011, she was named Forbes Magazine's fifth most powerful woman in the world (after No. 1 German Chancellor Angela Merkel, No. 2 Hillary Clinton, No. 3 President of Brazil Dilma Rousseff and No. 4 CEO of PepsiCo Indira Nooyi)., I thought it was absurd, says Sandberg. My mother even called to say, 'Well, dear, I do think you're very powerful, but I'm not sure you're more powerful than Michelle Obama,' and I'm thinking, 'Of course I'm not more powerful than Michelle Obama!' (Obama was No. 8, having dropped from the No. 1 spot in 2010.), I was really embarrassed, Sandberg says. People would congratulate me in the halls at Facebook, and I would literally tell them why it was silly. People would post it on Facebook, and I would call them and ask them to, you know, 'Can you take that off? I really don't feel comfortable.', My assistant pulled me into my conference room and closed the door. And she said, 'You're handling this really badly. Stop telling everyone who says congratulations how silly that list is, because you look insecure. You're showing everyone how uncomfortable you are with your own power, and that's not good, so just start saying thank you.' , Two lines of argument run through Lean In. One of them has to do with how society has changed through multiple generations of feminism. The other has to do with the way society views women and how that affects the way women view themselves., Boys, she says, are socialized to be assertive and aggressive and take leadership. Girls? We call our little girls bossy, Sandberg says. Go to a playground: Little girls get called 'bossy' all the time, a word that's almost never used for boys. And that leads directly to the problems women face in the workforce. When a man does a good job, everyone says, 'That's great.' When a woman does that same thing, she'll get feedback that says things like, 'Your results are good, but your peers just don't like you as much' or 'maybe you were a little aggressive.' , &ldquo; I want to be clear: I am not saying that men are too self-confident. That's not the problem. The problem is that women aren't self-confident enough., This isn't just Sandberg's observation. She cites data showing positive correlations between success and likability for men, and negative correlations between success and likability for women. That means that as a man gets more successful, he is better liked by men and women, and as a woman gets more successful, she is less liked by men and women, Sandberg explains. But I want to be clear: I am not saying that men are too self-confident. That's not the problem. The problem is that women aren't self-confident enough., In Lean In, Sandberg points to an experiment led by Columbia Business School and New York University professors. They gave the students a case study from the Harvard Business School about a successful entrepreneur, Heidi Roizen. But half of the students received the case study with one difference. Heidi was changed to Howard., Howard came across as a more appealing colleague, Sandberg writes. Heidi, on the other hand, was seen as selfish and not 'the type of person you would want to hire or work for.' The same data with a simple difference gender created vastly different impressions., Sandberg's book is full of statistics that reveal how even in 2013 women simply aren't making it to the top., We've ceased making progress at the top in any industry anywhere in the world, she says. In the United States, women have had 14 percent of the top corporate jobs and 17 percent of the board seats for 10 years. Ten years of no progress. In those same 10 years, women are getting more and more of the graduate degrees, more and more of the undergraduate degrees, and it's translating into more women in entry-level jobs, even more women in lower-level management. But there's absolutely been no progress at the top. You can't explain away 10 years. Ten years of no progress is no progress., The gender gap is particularly egregious in Sandberg's own industry; women make up less than 18 percent of the ranks of computer science majors., What's holding women back in computer science is the exact same thing ... that's holding women back in leadership, Sandberg says. It's something social scientists call stereotype threat., Stereotype threat means that the more we're aware of a stereotype, the more we act in accordance with it, Sandberg explains. So, stereotypically we believe girls are not good at math. Therefore, girls don't do well at math, and it self-perpetuates. If you ask a girl right before she takes a math test to check off 'M' or 'F' for male or female, she does worse on that test. The reason there aren't more women in computer science is there aren't enough women in computer science., In response to whether Sandberg ever felt chosen as one of the handful of women gifted enough to pass through to the top she says: It used to be the case, that ... there was only room for one or two. Women would look at each other in a room and know that because they were tokens only one of them was getting promoted. ... And they were competitive with each other, or at least that's what I've been told., But Sandberg thinks the situation has evolved and that today's companies and boards are looking to have more women at the table., There's a reason why men want to understand the challenges women face, she says, ... because then they're going to be better hirers, attractors and retainers of women. Warren Buffet has very generously said that one of the reasons he was so successful is that he was only competing with half the population. Companies that use the full talents of everyone those companies do better., &ldquo; I want us to be able to choose unencumbered by gender choosing for us. , Some of Sandberg's critics have questioned whether someone who has already made it to a position of wealth and power who is no longer necessarily tethered to duties at home can reasonably suggest that other women should follow in her path., I don't believe that everyone should make the same choices that everyone has to want to be a CEO or everyone should want to be a work-at-home mother, Sandberg responds. I want everyone to be able to choose, but I want us to be able to choose unencumbered by gender choosing for us. I have a 7-year-old son and a 5-year-old daughter. Success for me is that if my son chooses to be a stay-at-home parent, he is cheered on for that decision. And if my daughter chooses to work outside the home and is successful, she is cheered on and supported.
A Chinese farmer tends to bees producing honey to supplement her income at a farm in China's Anhui province., A Chinese farmer tends to bees producing honey to supplement her income at a farm in China's Anhui province., There was bombshell news from the world of honey two weeks ago, and somehow we missed it. Two big honey packers, including one of the largest in the country Groeb Farms of Onsted, Mich. admitted buying millions of dollars worth of honey that was falsely labeled., The goal of this mislabeling, which has been long suspected in the honey industry, was to acquire cheap honey from China. Chinese honey is subject to steep anti-dumping duties that the U.S. imposed back in 2008, after U.S. honey producers complained that Chinese exporters were selling their honey at artificially low prices., Chinese exporters, however, began sending their honey to middlemen in countries like Indonesia and Vietnam, who then re-labeled it as local product and sent it on to the U.S., In another tactic, Chinese exporters labeled containers of honey as something else, such as rice syrup., Both companies face criminal charges, but they've struck a deal to avoid immediate prosecution. The companies are promising to play by the rules and to set up programs to ensure that all the honey they buy in the future comes from legitimate sources. Groeb Farms also replaced its senior management last summer., This is a huge deal for the industry. This is the first admission by a U.S. packer, the actual user, that they were knowingly importing mislabeled honey, says Eric Wenger, chairman of True Source Honey, an industry consortium that has set up an auditing and testing system to guarantee the true origin of honey., True Source Honey was formed in 2010. According to Wenger, True Source-certified honey now accounts for at least a quarter of U.S. honey consumption., Jill Clark, vice president for sales and marketing at Dutch Gold Honey in Lancaster, Pa., which helped set up the program, wrote in an email to NPR that the recent indictments are just another reason why we felt it was necessary to verify ethical sourcing of honey.
The scene at a job fair in Manhattan earlier this month., The scene at a job fair in Manhattan earlier this month., There were 236,000 jobs added to payrolls in February many more than expected and the jobless rate unexpectedly dropped by two-tenths of a point, to 7.7 percent, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported Friday., The news came as a surprise to most economists. As we reported earlier, they had been expecting to hear that employers added about 160,000 jobs to payrolls and that the unemployment rate stayed near January's 7.9 percent., We'll be adding more details from the report and reactions to it, so hit your refresh button to be sure you're seeing our latest updates., Update at 9:35 a.m. ET. White House Says Recovery Is Gaining Traction:, While more work remains to be done, today's employment report provides evidence that the recovery that began in mid-2009 is gaining traction, the president's top economic adviser, Alan Krueger, writes on the White House blog. He adds that the economy has now added private sector jobs every month for three straight years, and a total of 6.35 million jobs have been added over that period., At 113.2 million, private sector employment in February was back to near where it was in October 2008 but was still down more than 2 million jobs from its peak of 115.7 million in January 2008., Update at 9:30 a.m. ET. Boehner Says Jobless Rate Is Still Above White House Projection:, House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, reacts to the news in a tweet:, Positive news in today's jobs report but unemployment still far above what @WhiteHouse projected w/its 'stimulus' http://j.mp/Zlwj9f, And a statement emailed to reporters:, Any job creation is positive news, but the fact is unemployment in America is still way above the levels the Obama White House projected when the trillion-dollar stimulus spending bill was enacted, and the federal government's ongoing spending binge has resulted in a debt that exceeds the size of our entire economy. ..., The White House typically posts its comments on its blog., Update at 9:22 a.m. ET. Will Stocks Rise Further?, On Wall Street, investors cheered the latest jobs figures, MarketWatch writes. Stock futures pointed to a higher opening, while the dollar also extended gains. Major indices were already trading in record-high territory., Update at 9:20 a.m. ET. Less Rosy Numbers:, According to BLS, the number of discouraged workers went up in February, to 885,000 from 804,000 the month before. Those are people who have given up looking for jobs because they don't think any are available. There were also 7.99 million people working part time for economic reasons, up slightly from 7.98 million in January., Update at 9:05 a.m. ET. Where Many Of The Jobs Were., According to BLS:, &mdash; Professional and business services firms employed 73,000 more people., &mdash; Construction companies added 48,000 jobs. (Paul Wiseman of The Associated Press says February was the best month for construction since March 2007.), &mdash; Employment at health care providers and related industries grew by 39,000., &mdash; Leisure and hospitality businesses added 24,000 jobs., &mdash; Retailers expanded their payrolls by nearly 24,000 jobs., &mdash; Manufacturing employment grew by 14,000., Update at 9 a.m. ET. Private Payrolls Rose By 246,000:, The shaving of government staffs continued in February, BLS says. There were 10,000 fewer workers on local, state and federal payrolls last month. But a 246,000-increase in payrolls at private employers produced the overall boost of 236,000., Update at 8:55 a.m. ET. From Early Headlines:, &mdash; Job Growth Surges Ahead. (The Wall Street Journal), &mdash; Payrolls Surge As U.S. Jobless Rate Falls To Five-Year Low. (Bloomberg News), &mdash; Robust Hiring Pushes Unemployment Rate Down To 7.7%. (Financial Times), Update at 8:50 a.m. ET. Good And Bad News In Revisions:, A month ago, BLS estimated there had been 157,000 jobs added to public and private payrolls in January. Now, it estimates there were 119,000 more jobs that month., But, BLS has now twice revised up its estimate of job growth in December. It began by saying there had been 155,000 jobs added that month. Later, it revised the figure to show growth of 196,000 jobs. Friday, it raised the December figure futher to 219,000., Update at 8:40 a.m. ET. Rate Is Lowest Since Obama Took Office:, At 7.7 percent, the jobless rate is the lowest it's been since December 2008's 7.3 percent. The month President Obama took office, January 2009, the rate stood at 7.8 percent. In the years since, it peaked at 10 percent in October 2009. It has now been just below 8 percent for six straight months.
Hoping to see more of these: A now hiring sign in the window of a bank in San Rafael, Calif., in January., Hoping to see more of these: A now hiring sign in the window of a bank in San Rafael, Calif., in January., Update at 8:35 a.m. ET. Things Were Better Than Expected:, Pleasant Surprises: 236,000 Jobs Added; Jobless Rate Dips To 7.7 Percent., Our original post:, From 'Morning Edition': Yuki Noguchi and Steve Inskeep preview the jobs report, Slow job growth and little change in the unemployment rate., That's what to expect this morning when the Bureau of Labor Statistics releases its February jobs report, NPR's Yuki Noguchi said earlier today on Morning Edition., Economists think we'll hear that there were about 160,000 jobs added to payrolls, she said, which may be enough to bring the unemployment rate down slightly perhaps to 7.8 percent from January's 7.9 percent., But in effect, Yuki added, the news is expected to be more of the same: Some job growth, but not enough to bring the jobless rate down significantly and perhaps not enough to prevent a slight uptick in that rate., The report is due at 8:30 a.m. ET. We'll pass along the news once its released and then sift through the report and reactions to it., One reason the unemployment rate has remained stuck around 8 percent for the past year: Companies downsized and invested in technology in recent years, Yuki said. That boosted their productivity and means they don't need to hire as many workers now., Related headlines:, &mdash; The Scariest Jobs Chart Ever Isn't Scary Enough. (Planet Money), &mdash; Making The Jobless Rate A Moving Target. (The Wall Street Journal), &mdash; European Stocks, U.S. Futures Rise Before Payrolls Report. (Bloomberg News), &mdash; Steady Job Gains Seen Bolstering Economy. (Reuters)
Who's on the hook?, Who's on the hook?, Some number of years from now, the technology may exist for cars to drive themselves. This could save thousands of lives a year (90 percent of fatal car accidents involve human error)., But getting the technology right won't be enough. Governments and courts will have to figure out lots of new legal and regulatory issues. One key question: If a driverless car crashes, who's liable?, It's absolutely the case that after the first accident involving an automated vehicle, there will be an automated ambulance chaser following, says Robert Hartwig, president of the Insurance Information Institute., The auto industry is aware of the legal risk. We have great exposure as an industry in terms of product liability, says Dan Gage of the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers. And I think as an industry ... most of us suspect that there will always be someone in that driver's seat., Jeff Dial, an Arizona legislator, introduced a bill last year that would update Arizona law to cover driverless cars., After I introduced the bill, then suddenly all the insurance companies started approaching me with the questions of the liability, he says. The more you deal with this issue, the more the issue grows and grows., One possible solution comes from the vaccine industry., In the 1980s, the rising threat of liability prompted vaccine manufacturers to pull out of the business. So Congress stepped in and created a new system for people who are injured by vaccines. Cases are handled in special hearings, and victims are paid out of a fund created by a special tax on vaccines., With the threat of liability reduced, more companies started making vaccines again.
One of the defining graphs of our time (yes, there are defining graphs of our time) comes from the blog Calculated Risk. It tracks the job market in every U.S. recession and recovery since WWII and it shows just how brutal the the past few years have been., Business Insider calls this the Scariest Jobs Chart Ever. But the Scariest Jobs Chart Ever isn't quite scary enough., The chart cuts off when employment gets back to its previous peak. But, because of population growth, getting back to where we were five years ago isn't enough. To get back to full employment, we need to have millions more jobs than we had then., This led us to wonder: What would Scariest Jobs Chart Ever look like if you compared the past five years with comparable periods for all of the other postwar recessions. How much worse is it this time?, Here's the answer:, Source: Bureau of Labor StatisticsCredit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, In previous postwar recoveries, the number of jobs was about 7 percent above its previous peak by this point, on average., In other words, if this had been a typical recession and recovery, the U.S. economy would now have roughly 10 million more jobs than it did at the previous peak. In fact, there are now three million fewer jobs., There was a bit of good news in the jobs report that came out this morning: The U.S. added 236,000 jobs last month. But, as these charts make clear, there's still a long, long way to go., Note: This graph was updated on Friday, March 8 to reflect the release of a new jobs report.
As we await Friday's much-anticipated report about the February unemployment rate and how many jobs were added to employers' payrolls last month, there are these new bits of economic data to chew over:, &mdash; The Employment and Training Administration says there were 340,000 first-time claims for unemployment insurance last week. That's down from 7,000 the previous week. Claims continue at a pace that's the lowest since first-quarter 2008., &mdash; Employers announced plans for 55,356 layoffs in February, according to outplacement consultants Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas. That's up 37 percent from January and 7 percent from February 2012. But the 95,786 layoffs announced so far in 2013 are a 9 percent decline from the same two months a year earlier., &mdash; American workers' productivity decreased at a 1.9 percent annual rate in fourth-quarter 2012, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reports., As for Friday's report, Reuters says economists expect to hear that the economy added 160,000 jobs in February, while the unemployment rate held at 7.9 percent.
Lanes of trucks wait to cross the border from Mexico into Nogales, Ariz. Fallout from the sequester could increase wait times for perishable cargo., Lanes of trucks wait to cross the border from Mexico into Nogales, Ariz. Fallout from the sequester could increase wait times for perishable cargo., Budget-cutting from the government sequester that began March 1 could affect U.S. exports and imports, including what we eat., Customs and Border Protection officers regulate trade at the nation's 329 ports of entry, in harbors, airports and on land., One by one, drivers approach booths with Customs and Border Protection officers at the Mariposa Port of Entry in Nogales, Ariz. More winter produce enters here than at any other place in the U.S. Semis filled with tomatoes, cucumbers and peppers headed to grocery stores around the country., What goes on here is affecting people over the entire nation, says Lance Klump, chief CBP officer at the port., Cargo from here also makes its way to Canada and Asia. Up to 1,600 trucks a day come through the port., On a recent day, Klump says it's not that busy only a 45-minute wait for one of three open lanes. Like at the grocery store, more lanes open or close depending on the wait. But Klump says they've never had to stop letting trucks enter., We have always been able to manage to continue processing, he says. It may raise the wait times and everything, but we've always managed to do that., With sequestration cuts in effect, though, port officials have to reduce costs. Local officials wouldn't confirm how that's supposed to happen, but Nogales produce importer Jaime Chamberlain has been talking with them. His company ships hundreds of millions of pounds of fresh fruit and vegetables every year., There's a very good possibility that we may lose hours during the week and also possibly crossing on Sundays, Chamberlain says., Fruits and vegetables don't stop growing; they have to be picked every day. So imagine what happens to produce in loaded trucks backed up at the border., Border security agents stop a truck at a checkpoint on the way to Nogales, Ariz. More winter produce enters the U.S. at the border crossing than at any other point of entry in the country., Border security agents stop a truck at a checkpoint on the way to Nogales, Ariz. More winter produce enters the U.S. at the border crossing than at any other point of entry in the country., It'll rot, he says. It'll rot in our trucks waiting to cross the line., Lost produce means higher prices for what does get to U.S. markets. Chamberlain says it also jeopardizes relationships in Canada and Asia., We are at risk right now of not only not maintaining the business that we already have right now with some of the countries we do business with, but losing the business, he says., Again, it's not yet clear exactly what will happen to ports of entry under sequestration. Colleen Kelley has some idea, though. She heads the union that represents Customs and Border Protection officers., The agency has notified us that employees will be serving up to 14 unpaid furlough days between now and the end of September, she says., Kelley has been told to expect the first furlough notices in the middle of March. The furloughs would start 30 days later., That's only personnel. Agencies have to cut across the board., However, it's likely one thing won't be sacrificed: security. Even if only one lane is open, every truck will pass through radiation detectors. Officers also watch for explosives and drugs., We're going to stop everything that we possibly can for contraband or threats to the United States here, chief officer Klump says., In an odd twist, the Mariposa Port is in the midst of a $250 million upgrade to add lanes and streamline operations. At the same time, there may not be enough personnel to staff the new lanes.
Two months ago, the popular political blogger Andrew Sullivan left the comfortable world of big media and struck out on his own. His bold new plan: Ask readers to pay $19.99 a year or more to subscribe to his blog., It was either quit blogging, or suck it up and become a businessman, he told me., The usual way bloggers make money (if they make money at all) is to sell advertising. But Sullivan figured he could get his devoted reader base to pay. Within the first week, he'd raised half a million dollars. By the end of about two months, the total had crept up to $625,000., The goal, for him and his staff of about eight employees, is to raise roughly a million dollars by the end of the year., We ran Sullivan's figures his readership, how much time they spend on the site by Rob Leathern, ad guy with a firm called Optimal Social. He was impressed by how engaged Sullivan's readers are they spend an average of 17 minutes a day on the site, and 80 percent check in twice a day., It's definitely valuable real estate, Leathern said, and he figured Sullivan could raise about $840,000 a year if he sold ads., For now, though, Sullivan would rather sell subscriptions than sell ads (and chase page views). If you're all about chasing the page views, it doesn't matter what the bloody page views are in the end, he said. The rat race just takes over., His site is a mix of short and long posts and his favorites as a writer tend to be the long ones. Since he switched to the subscription model, he has noticed that those long posts seem to be popular with the people who are paying to read. In other words, Andrew Sullivan the blogger now has an incentive to write posts that work for Andrew Sullivan the businessman.
Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke testifies before the Senate Banking Committee in Washington last month. Some analysts wonder if he and other policymakers have kept interest rates too low for too long., Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke testifies before the Senate Banking Committee in Washington last month. Some analysts wonder if he and other policymakers have kept interest rates too low for too long., The stock market's long climb from its recession bottom has some people concerned it may be a bubble about to burst a bubble artificially pumped up by the Federal Reserve's easy-money policy. That's led to calls even from within the Fed for an end to the central bank's extraordinary efforts to keep interest rates low., Even as the Dow Jones industrial average was reaching its nominal record Tuesday, Jeffrey Lacker, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, continued his criticism of the central bank's massive intervention, calling it unhealthy. Another regional Fed president, Charles Plosser of Philadelphia, told a gathering of Pennsylvania businessmen that the Fed's easy-money policy could cause financial instability and inflation. Plosser said it's time for Fed policymakers to begin winding down their efforts to lower interest rates., Causing A Stock Bubble?, Randall Kroszner, a former Fed policymaker and now a professor at the University of Chicago's Booth School of Business, says as the economy heals, the debate over Fed policy is healthy., The fundamentals are starting to come back, and I think there's a legitimate debate on whether more needs to be done, Kroszner said., But is the Fed's low-interest-rate policy causing a bubble in the stock market? After all, there are still lots of things wrong with the economy. It's still growing very sluggishly not fast enough to bring down the unemployment rate, which remains high., Alan Blinder, whose book After the Music Stopped deals with the financial crisis and the Fed's extraordinary intervention, doesn't think there's a stock bubble. But Blinder, a former vice chairman of the Fed, says the central bank's low-rate policy has pushed the market higher., Stock prices are supposed to depend on earnings and interest rates, and the Fed has made interest rates very low, Blinder said. But the other part of it is earnings are very high. You may have noticed that the share of national income accounted for by corporate profits has recently hit all-time highs., Nudging Investors To Take Risks, Blinder says with company profits soaring, it's hard to make a case that their share prices are too high and there's a bubble developing in stocks. And, he says, higher stock prices fit in with the Fed's growth strategy: To gently nudge or maybe not so gently nudge people into taking a little risk instead of putting all their money in Treasury bills and under the mattress., There are also worries that there's a bubble developing in corporate bonds, and it's true investors have driven corporate bond prices very high. But Blinder says it's hard to consider that a bubble because it's obvious why it's occurred. The Fed's policies have driven rates so low on government bonds that investors are chasing the higher yields on corporate bonds. But, Blinder says, they know the Fed's extreme policy won't last forever., So at some point these bond prices have to come down as interest rates go up, he says. And again, everybody knows that, but of course nobody knows the timing. Even [Fed Chairman] Ben Bernanke doesn't know the timing., But when is the right time for the Fed to start to discourage the risk-taking party fueled by its low interest rates, or take away the spiked punch bowl, as the old analogy goes. That was on former Fed Chairman Paul Volcker's mind when he spoke to the National Association for Business Economics in Washington on Monday., Because it's never popular to take the so-called punch bowl away or weaken the liquor, Volcker said. And there's a lot of liquor out there now. Mechanically, yeah, sure it can be done. They put it in, they can pull it out. But will it be done at the crucial time in a delicate kind of way? It's gonna be a big challenge., The Fed raised interest rates too soon in the 1930s and smothered the economy. It moved too late in the 1970s and damaging inflation resulted. At least this Fed can learn from those mistakes.
Now that Pope Benedict XVI has officially gone into retirement, the next leader of the Catholic Church has a lot to consider, including finances., Now that Pope Benedict XVI has officially gone into retirement, the next leader of the Catholic Church has a lot to consider, including finances., The next pope will be the spiritual leader of the world's Catholics. He will also be leading a multibillion-dollar financial empire. And from a business perspective, the Catholic Church is struggling., We talked to several people who study the business of the church. Here are a few of the issues they pointed out., 1. Globally, the church's employees are in the wrong place., Most Catholics live in Latin America, Asia and Africa, and that's also where growth in church membership is higher. But only about half of all priests are in Latin America, Africa and Asia., If the church were a business, the CEO would just transfer existing workers to other parts of the world. But the church just isn't organized to make that kind of thing happen., On matters on faith and morals, the church is very centralized, very hierarchical, says Chuck Zech, director of the Center for the Study of Church Management at Villanova University. But on the temporal issues of finances and actually running the day-to-day operation, each diocese is very independent., A diocese is a geographical area with a bunch of churches in it. Run by a bishop. And they all basically raise their own money, through collections, and make their own budget., 2. In the U.S., the church doesn't take advantage of its size., Because each diocese makes most of its own business decisions, the church is missing out on purchasing power, procurement, economy of scale, says Kerry Robinson, director of the National Leadership Roundtable on Church Management., If all the Catholic dioceses and schools and hospitals in the U.S. got together to negotiate bulk prices for the things they needed just ordinary stuff like office products and transportation the church could save billions of dollars a year, Robinson says., 3. The church's financial reporting is a mess, Without systemic accounting and disclosure, there is enough doubt these days about how money is being managed that we don't whether the hungry are being fed, the naked are being clothed and those in need are getting health care and education, says Jim Post, a management professor at Boston University., There is no standard financial reporting for church dioceses. This was a huge frustration for everyone we talked to: It's hard to figure out how to fix what's wrong with the church's business if you can't figure out what's going on with the money., And as the Catholic Church has recently discovered, this lack of transparency can have much darker implications., Tom Doyle, a priest with a Harvard MBA, says one of the big organizational challenges to come out of the recent child sex abuse scandal is the erosion of confidence. People stopped trusting that the Catholic Church would tell them the truth., Doyle used to work for Deloitte &amp; Touche, the big consulting firm, before he became a priest., How do you get trust back? You earn it, he says. So we are going to have to err on side of being more transparent about things than we have in the past.
There was modest to moderate economic growth across the nation as the year began, the Federal Reserve says in its latest beige book review of conditions around the nation., According to the central bank, five of its 12 districts reported that economic growth was moderate in January and early February. Those five: Dallas, New York, Minneapolis, Richmond and St. Louis., Another five reported that activity expanded at a modest pace. They are: Atlanta, Cleveland, Kansas City, Philadelphia and San Francisco., In Fed speak, moderate growth is better than modest growth., As for the last two, the Boston District said the economy continued to expand slowly, and the Chicago District reported that economic activity grew at a slow pace. In Fed speak, continued to expand slowly is better than grew at a slow pace., The beige book, written eight times a year and named for the traditional color of its cover, is prepared by the Fed's staff for meetings of the bank's policymakers., The day's other major economic news, as we reported earlier, was a survey showing that private employers added an estimated 198,000 jobs last month. Meanwhile, the stock market is up again today building on Tuesday's record-high close for the Dow Jones industrial average.
The scene at a job fair in New York City on Feb. 28., The scene at a job fair in New York City on Feb. 28., There were 198,000 jobs added to private employers' payrolls in February, according to the latest ADP National Employment Report a privately produced snapshot of the employment picture that's sometimes a signal of what the Bureau of Labor Statistics will say when it releases its data from the same month., ADP didn't only report there was solid, if not spectacular, growth last month. It also revised up its estimate of the growth in January. It now says private employers added 215,000 jobs that month 23,000 more than previously though., In the ADP report, Moody's Analytics chief economist Mark Zandi says that the job market remains sturdy in the face of significant fiscal headwinds. Businesses are adding to payrolls more strongly at the start of 2013 with gains across all industries and business sizes. Tax increases and government spending cuts don't appear to be affecting the job market., The BLS data on February's employment and unemployment figures are due Friday at 8:30 a.m. ET. In its last report, BLS said the nation's unemployment rate edged up to 7.9 percent in January from 7.8 percent a month before, and that there were 157,000 jobs added to public and private payrolls in the first month of the year. According to Reuters, economists expect to hear that there were 160,000 jobs added to payrolls last month and that the jobless rate stayed at 7.9 percent.
Editor's Note: This video contains a scene of childbirth that includes graphic imagery and explicit language., Credit: John W. Poole/NPR, Increasingly, people are continuing to work past 65. Almost a third of Americans between the ages of 65 and 70 are working, and among those older than 75, about 7 percent are still on the job. In Working Late, a series for Morning Edition, NPR profiles older adults who are still in the workforce., Sometimes you can't retire even if you want to. For Dian Sparling, a certified nurse midwife in Fort Collins, Colo., there's no one to take over her practice. But at 71, she's finding that staying up all night delivering babies is harder than it used to be., Sparling founded an obstetrics and gynecology practice called Womancare 31 years ago. During her career, she has delivered around 2,000 babies. Last year, she decided she'd retire from that part of her job, though she continued to see patients in the office. She didn't miss being on call the person who's awakened in the middle of the night when a patient goes into labor., When you're on call, you just can't really plan for anything. You just need to be available, both physically and your heart and soul available, to do midwifery work. And when it's an unknown, I think it's a little bit more draining, Sparling says., A few months ago, one of the other midwives in her practice had to take an extended medical leave. So Sparling had to go back to being on call., Dian Sparling, a certified nurse midwife in Fort Collins, Colo., recently went back to being on call., Dian Sparling, a certified nurse midwife in Fort Collins, Colo., recently went back to being on call., It would be horrible if I had to do this and stay up all night and didn't love what I do, she says., 'A Wonder To Behold', It's just past daybreak at the hospital's birth center, and Sparling has been here since 4 a.m. with patient Amanda Trujillo, who is about to deliver her third baby. It's her second with Sparling as her midwife. The two are comfortable with each other. The atmosphere is relaxed. Sparling tells Trujillo to just be patient a little while longer., When Sparling leaves Amanda and goes out to the nurses' station in the birth center, her spiky white hair sets her apart from her younger colleagues. Nurse Kathy Clarkson makes a point of telling her she was missed during her brief semi-retirement., We're glad that you're back working again, Dian, Clarkson says. When you retired, we were all crying., Nurse Julie Christin says that as a midwife, Sparling works more closely with women in labor than do most MDs., Physicians rely on us to do a lot of the labor support, Christin says. But Dian spends a lot of time with her patients when they're in labor. I like that, because then she's involved and can make decisions quicker, and does what the patient wants to do, which is good., Sparling is in tune with them emotionally as well as physically, Clarkson says., And then it's time for Sparling to get back in tune with Trujillo, who's ready to start pushing. Her husband, Isaiah, supports one leg, and delivery nurse Keri Ferguson supports the other., &ldquo; It would be horrible if I had to do this and stay up all night and didn't love what I do., - Certified Nurse Midwife Dian Sparling, As Amanda Trujillo works, her husband, Sparling and Ferguson cheer her on and report on the baby's progress. First his head emerges. Then his shoulders. And finally, there is a new little person named Samuel in the world, though at nearly 9 pounds, maybe not so little., There he is, Amanda, Sparling says. Reach down here and grab your baby., Samuel is born just before 10 a.m. Sparling has been at the hospital for six hours. And she's jazzed., People have asked me, 'Does this feeling after a delivery ever get old?' Absolutely not, she says. It's a wonder to behold, and my adrenaline stops pumping about two hours after a delivery. And then I can go to sleep., But it takes her twice as long to recover from an all-nighter as it used to. Her closest friends worry about her. Sparling is long divorced. Her two sons live back East, so this group of friends are the ones she refers to as her support people., We think she should be retired, but she doesn't think she can, says Sparling's friend, Wayne Peak. She's our age and we're retired and we like to travel and relax a whole bunch, and she's on call and has to stay up in the middle of the night and deliver babies. That's not good. , Another friend, Nancy Grove, says she was not happy when Sparling first told her she was going back to being on call., Once I stopped thinking about myself and started thinking a little more about Dian, I really wanted to support her in what she wants to do, needs to do, because she's a very valuable asset in our community, Grove says., A Line In The Sand, Sparling has reassured her friends that she will not keep delivering babies forever. In a way, she longs for retirement from deliveries, from the office, from work. But that would mean finding someone to take over her practice and run it the way she believes it should be run. For instance, no patient is turned away because of lack of insurance or inability to pay., The truth of the matter is this is not a money-making business, Sparling says. It makes our salaries. It makes our health care insurance payments for ourselves, it pays for our malpractice insurance, which is required by the state and also by our hospital. We can exist and pay for ourselves, but it doesn't make money., Sparling says that at 71, she realizes time is not on her side. As much as she loves her work, she wants to pursue the other pleasures of life., One of which is travel. There are so many places in the United States and the world that I would love to go, Sparling says. And one is taking piano lessons. I was given a piano at age 7 by my grandmother, and really never made proper use of it and practice. And you need time to do that., Sparling has given herself deadlines for retiring before. None have stuck. But she's still trying., And now I guess I can draw a line in the sand and say it's going to be [at] 75, I will no longer be seeing patients in the office, she says., But she acknowledges that maybe a line in the sand isn't the best metaphor. She says, you know how sand flows.
A trader on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange earlier this week., A trader on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange earlier this week., Update at 4:09 p.m. ET. A New Record:, The Dow Industrials finished in record territory today. Gaining 89 points, it closed at 14,253.77, its highest level since Oct. 9,2007., That is, the Dow has recovered all the losses it suffered during the Great Recession., It really does represent an achievement that we have climbed out of this crater, Jack Ablin, chief investment officer at Chicago's BMO Private Bank, told The Wall Street Journal., Before you take too much joy out of this, we'll point you to our friends at the Planet Money blog., Jacob Goldstein writes that if you adjust for inflation, this isn't really a record in any meaningful sense., It would need to rise another 10 percent or so to hit an all time high in real (i.e. inflation-adjusted) terms, Jacob writes., Our Original Post Continues:, The number to keep an eye on today:, 14,164.53., ^DJI data by YCharts, That's the Dow Jones industrial average's record high close, set on Oct. 9, 2007, and we're watching as it again flirts with that milestone., The Wall Street Journal's MarketBeat blog writes that Happy Days Are Here Again. The Dow, it says:, Still has to close above 14164 for it to be 'official,' but it's a notable achievement nonetheless. The stock market has been on a wild ride. The Dow fell 53% from 2007 through the market's low point on March 9, 2009, of 6547, with the vast majority of that coming after the September 2008 crash. Nearly four years to the day from that low, the Dow has rebounded 116%., Fueling this morning's rise: China vowed to maintain its growth target and investors bet central banks will continue stimulus measures, according to Bloomberg News., We'll report back about the closing numbers., Update at 12:40 p.m. ET. Planet Money's Buzz Kill., Our friend Jacob Goldstein points out that:, After adjusting for inflation, the Dow was higher in 2000 than it is today. It was also higher in 2007. It would need to rise another 10 percent or so to hit an all time high in real (i.e. inflation-adjusted) terms.
Ford unveils the F-150 Atlas concept pickup during January's North American International Auto Show in Detroit. Experts say the boom in construction will boost pickup sales., Ford unveils the F-150 Atlas concept pickup during January's North American International Auto Show in Detroit. Experts say the boom in construction will boost pickup sales., Economists look at many tea leaves as they try to determine the health of the economy. One of the most important surrounds vehicle sales, and more specifically pickup truck sales, which are tied to the construction industry. And as last month's sales rose 18 percent, the auto industry is betting big on a real estate rebound., It's arguable that the Ford F-150 is the most important vehicle to come out of Detroit since the Model-T. It's also built where many parts for the old Model-T were made in Dearborn, Mich., Standing between two separate assembly lines, the plant's manager, Brad Huff, explains how a truck comes together., The frame's built upside down; it gives us easy access, he says. So, then the frame is built up and turned over. Then it comes here on this line where we pick up the tire and wheel. And then we wind up at the marriage station where the body meets the frame., The F-150 has been the best-selling truck for 36 years in the U.S., and it's been the best-selling vehicle of any kind for 31 years. They build 7,500 trucks in the Dearborn plant per week. There are almost 600,000 types of permutations of the pickup, whereas cars usually have a couple hundred at most., There are color, moon roof and trim options for the Ford pickups, and the list goes on. I know it's hard to explain that it comes out to 600,000, but when you put all those different combinations together, it comes right down to it, Huff says., Now Ford is rumored to be introducing a new version of its pickup truck the company had a concept vehicle premiering at the Detroit Auto Show. Doug Scott, marketing manager at Ford, won't say exactly when a new truck is coming, but he does say something big is on the way., Housing is the missing element, he says. Housing is now coming back. We've seen over the last four, five months improvement in housing ... and all that is a bellwether and a great indicator for the full-size pickup business, so we're really optimistic., While all U.S. auto companies are showing increases in car sales, it's a rebound in pickup trucks and real estate that really gets Detroit car executives excited., For every Ford F-series that's sold, they're making anywhere from [$6,000] to $8,000 in profit, says Alec Gutierrez, an analyst with Kelley Blue Book. Whereas your average Fusion or Escape or Focus, they might be making [$800], maybe $2,000 in profit, at most., Each of the carmakers is poised to capture any uptick in new housing construction. Ram just released a new truck, General Motors is coming out with two of them, and Ford executives are winking about something big in the works. Gutierrez says even the small housing gains can mean big money, truck-wise., As housing starts to improve and as commercial real estate starts to improve and just construction in general, that's where you really start to see strength in the pickup truck market, as small businesses have to get these trucks so they can haul equipment and people back to the job sites, he says., Before the auto bailouts and the economic collapse, almost all the profits from the Big Three came for trucks and SUVs. That has changed, especially for GM. But the pressure on GM is cooking in a different way than Ford. It's relaunching its Chevy Silverado and GMC Sierra this spring., Kenn Bakowski, marketing manager at GM, says that automaker's new trucks are the most important product launches in the company's history, because GM has something to prove., So as you look for a company that's on the rebound definitely on its way back this is a big sign, Bakowski says. That we can be competitive here and that we can win here that's very important to us., This is a race essentially between Ford and GM, with Ram a distance third and Japanese trucks bringing up the rear., Will we outsell our competitor in terms of full-size pickups? That's our goal. We did in January. Are you looking for me to throw down the gauntlet? I think I just did, Bakowski says., Ford and Chrysler say bring it on. And so the truck war begins.
North Carolina farmers Buddy Hoffner (left) and son Chris have been growing barley for Riverbend Malt House in Asheville since 2010. Riverbend then processes the grain into malt for use by local breweries., North Carolina farmers Buddy Hoffner (left) and son Chris have been growing barley for Riverbend Malt House in Asheville since 2010. Riverbend then processes the grain into malt for use by local breweries., Brent Manning is a maltster on a mission. The co-founder of Riverbend Malt House in Asheville, N.C., wants people to be able to taste local grains in North Carolina's beers, just as vino aficionados can identify the provenance of fine wines., In the wine industry ... they will tell you that the No. 1 Syrah grape grows on this hillside over here because it's a bit rockier, Manning explains. It's that very same connection to the soil and the underlying geology that creates these nuances in flavors., And a critical element in creating beer with truly local flavor, Manning contends, is malt made from local grains., Asheville's beer lovers are farm-to-table, local, local, local-focused, Manning says. But when he and business partner Brian Simpson opened Riverbend in 2010, it was almost comical that with so much of this local beer, the only thing local [in the beer] was the water., Valley Malt, in Hadley, Mass., works with 25 farmers growing six different types of grain in the Northeast., Valley Malt, in Hadley, Mass., works with 25 farmers growing six different types of grain in the Northeast., As we've reported, water certainly can impart flavor to beer. But when it comes to creating a distinct North Carolina flavor, Manning is focused on locally sourced malt., Malt is an essential element in beer, along with water, hops and yeast. But while most beer drinkers know that malt comes from grain, many have no idea how it's made., That's where the maltster yes, that's the name for people who malt comes in: between the farmer, who grows the grain, and the brewer, who makes the beer., To make malt, the raw grain (typically barley, wheat or rye) is sprouted in water, then dried. The process creates enzymes, breaks down the starch in the grain and produces sugars all critical before brewing can begin., For decades, breweries have typically purchased their malt from large-scale, mechanized facilities that pool massive volumes of grains grown throughout the U.S., Canada and Europe., The explosion of microbreweries in recent years has spurred a small but growing craft malt industry, where tiny malt houses facilities where malt is produced conduct the malting process, often entirely by hand., Emphasis on small. Andrea Stanley, who opened Valley Malt in Hadley, Mass., with her husband in 2010, says their business produces in one year what a typical Midwest malt house processes in a single day., Throwback Brewery in New Hampshire is one of almost 20 New England breweries using malts from Massachusetts' micro-malt house Vally Malt., Throwback Brewery in New Hampshire is one of almost 20 New England breweries using malts from Massachusetts' micro-malt house Vally Malt., Back in Asheville, Brent Manning acknowledges that Riverbend also is microscopic on the grain-buyer scale right now., But micro-malting isn't about being big, after all. Riverbend's goal, Manning says, is to create another niche market for these farmers to sell their grain to., That's certainly true for farmer Peter Martens, who grows a variety of grains on his certified organic farm in New York's Finger Lakes region. In 2010, he and his father planted 20 acres of malting barley for Valley Malt, more out of curiosity than anything else., This year, they've planted more than 80 acres of malting barley. With demand strong, Martens is considering boosting production even further., Craft malt houses have another benefit for farmers, says Manning: They offer some insurance against the vagaries of the market. Farmers' livelihoods depend on the price they get when they sell their product and that price can vary wildly. Riverbend's goal was to get farmers out of that commodity price loop, Manning says., Amy Poirier says that has proven true on her family's farm, Hoffner Organic Farms, in Mount Ulla, N.C. Contracting with Riverbend has guaranteed a set price for their barley each year, she says. So those fluctuations, Poirier says, we don't have to worry about them as much., Back in upstate New York, farmer Peter Martens says he's now getting calls regularly from new maltsters looking for certified organic barley., More importantly, the craft maltsters seem to be really knowledgeable about what they're doing and intent on building a business model that can last, Martens says., Brewing locally sourced beer is a business, after all, which means everyone in the production chain must have an eye toward staying in the black. Even so, the locavore ethos is alive and well., In Massachusetts, for instance, Valley Malt encourages small farmers just learning how to grow grain for malt, Andrea Stanley says. She and her husband currently work with 25 farmers and offer assistance with seed, equipment and harvesting., It is a lot of coordination and a lot of work, Stanley says. I could easily just tell one of our [more experienced] farmers, 'Can you plant more acres for me?' ... But for now, we have certain values that are driving our business that just aren't about the bottom line.
Related: The floor of the New York Stock Exchange is increasingly irrelevant to the stock market. But a picture of a room full of computers would be super boring., Related: The floor of the New York Stock Exchange is increasingly irrelevant to the stock market. But a picture of a room full of computers would be super boring., Just a quick, cranky reminder: Despite what you may have read, the Dow Jones industrial average did not hit a new high today in any meaningful sense., After adjusting for inflation, the Dow was higher in 2000 than it is today. It was also higher in 2007. It would need to rise another 10 percent or so to hit an all time high in real (i.e., inflation-adjusted) terms., When reporting on other numbers that change over time, it's routine to adjust for inflation. So when people talk about wages stagnating for American households, it means that, after you adjust for inflation, the median wage is roughly the same as it was 15 years ago. If you didn't adjust for inflation, you would say the median wage has risen by more than 40 percent over the past 15 years. But that would be a meaningless statement., It's equally meaningless for the Dow. And even if the Dow did hit a real, inflation-adjusted, all-time high, it wouldn't mean much anyway. As our colleague Adam Davidson wrote last year:, The Dow average, drawn out to two decimal places, may seem like some perfectly scientific number, but it's far from it. A small committee selects 30 big companies I.B.M., G.E., McDonald's, Disney and so forth and then adds up the price of their stocks. Then the analysts divide it by the Dow Divisor, a misleadingly precise-seeming number formulated to account for things like dividends and splits that right now is, well, about 0.132129493. The resulting figure is repeated throughout the country., And those are the least of the Dow's problems. More troubling is that it ignores the overall size of companies and pays attention to only their share prices. This causes all sorts of oddities. ExxonMobil, for example, divides its value into nearly five billion lower-cost shares, while Caterpillar has around 650 million more expensive ones. Therefore ExxonMobil, one of the largest companies in history, pulls less weight on the Dow than a company less than a fifth its size., There are other, less arbitrary indexes of the U.S. stock market, such as the S&P; 500, which tracks 500 (rather than just 30) big U.S. companies. The S&P; 500, for what it's worth, is below it's all-time highs in both nominal and inflation-adjusted terms.
Not just an empty suit., Hi! It's Ask a Banker! Once again, I'm a former banker, current Dealbreaker editor and occasional answerer of questions here. Send more questions to planetmoney@npr.org with ask a banker in the subject line, or ask on Twitter (@planetmoney). This week's question comes from Ellen in Minneapolis and I think you'll like it: , Q. Please explain what the tri-party repo market and (commercial?) paper market are and why they are important., We may need to start at the end why they are important because while Ellen might just be curious about tri-party repo, there's some chance that no one else cares. One classic way to make people care is to swap boring-sounding terms for scary-sounding terms, since everyone likes to be scared. So:, SHADOW BANKING! Is SHADOW BANKING scary enough for you?, Tri-party repo and commercial paper are key parts of the shadow banking system. And shadow banking is like banking, only shadier, which is saying something., This requires a quick detour into: What is banking?, Banks take your money, lend it to someone else, and give it back to you when you want it back. Of course, instead of me putting money in a checking account at Chase, and my neighbor taking out a mortgage from Chase, I could just lend money to my neighbor directly. Why not do that? Why do we need a bank? Here are three reasons.*, 1. Credit intermediation. Banks decide who should get loans. I don't know if my neighbor is going to pay back any money I lend him, and I don't have any expertise in finding out. The bank hopefully does., 2. Diversification. Even if my neighbor is a trustworthy guy, he might still end up unable to pay back his mortgage. If I lend him all my money and he's hit by a bus, that's bad for me. (Worse for him, but this is Ask A Banker, not Ask A Humanitarian.) Banks take money from lots of savers and give it to lots of borrowers, so any one borrower's default doesn't hurt any one saver too badly., 3. Maturity transformation. My neighbor wants to pay back his mortgage over 30 years; I want to be able to get my money back whenever I walk by an ATM. Banks solve this through another sort of diversification: everyone can take their money out at any given time, but only a fraction of them will. Mostly. Sometimes this function breaks down, and people try to take out more money than the bank can access quickly. This is called a run on the bank, and it is bad, and much of modern banking is structured around preventing it., So those are the textbook reasons to put your money in a bank rather than just lending it to some random guy. But in the real world there are some good reasons not to put your money in banks. One is: Banks aren't always all that good at banking. Perhaps you've noticed. Why would you give all your money to Citibank?, For you and me, the answer is mostly deposit insurance: If Citi loses all your money, the U.S. government will give it back to you. The government charges banks for this insurance, and also regulates to make sure that banks are healthy and at least try not to lose your money., Deposit insurance covers accounts of up to $250,000. That's more than enough for most people. But if you are, say, a big company that needs to keep a lot of cash around to pay all your workers, you're going to have way more than $250,000 lying around. You could just put money in uninsured bank deposits, but that approach is pretty risky, because, y'know, banks., There's also interest. Different places to park your money for short periods of time pay different amounts of interest. If you're parking a lot of money, you might want to park it at a place that pays more interest than your local intergalactic bank., Investors who want yield or safety that banks can't provide turn to shadow banking: institutions that provide some of the credit intermediation, diversification and maturity transformation benefits of banking, but without being banks. And without being regulated like banks., Let's say you're a corporate treasurer and you have $50 million that you need to have constant access to, to pay bills and stuff. It's what you call cash on your corporate balance sheet. One thing you could do is just keep it in literal cash a pile of 5 million $10 bills in the break room but no one does this for logistical reasons. (How do you get it to your Dubuque office?), Another thing you could do is put it in a checking account at a bank, but with $50 million you're taking a lot of risk that your bank won't blow itself up tomorrow, and getting 0.00% interest on $50 million isn't that appealing., But what if someone else say a hedge fund, or an investment bank came to you and asked to borrow $50 million, and told you that you could get it back whenever you wanted, on one day's notice? That's the same deal your bank is offering, except that it's a hedge fund or investment bank, which is even riskier than your local savings bank., Ah, but the hedge fund says: I'll give you collateral! And I'll pay you interest! So it'll be safer than leaving your money at the bank, and maybe more lucrative. Here's how it'll work:, 1. Today, you give me $50 million, and I give you high-quality bonds worth, say, $55 million., 2. Tomorrow, you give me back my bonds, and I give you back $50 million plus a teeny bit of interest.**, Even more important, the way it works when it doesn't work is:, 1. Today, you give me $50 million, and I give you bonds worth $55 million., 2. Tomorrow, I'm bankrupt/nowhere to be found., 3. So you sell my bonds for, let's say, $54 million, and still get your money back with interest.***, 4. So that's nice., This is called repo, which is a dumb word. First of all, it's short for repurchase, which you might note doesn't contain an o. Second, it's probably better to think of it as a secured loan a loan with bonds (or stocks, etc.) as collateral than as a repurchase., But technically, yes, I'm selling you those bonds for $50 million today, and we're agreeing that I'll repurchase them tomorrow for $50 million plus interest, so, sure, repurchase., The collateral serves some of the same purpose, for shadow banking, as the government guarantee serves for regular banking: it protects the person looking for a place to park cash. It's not quite as good as the government guarantee, since there's always the possibility that the collateral will lose value faster than you can sell it. (Often when the borrower is going bust, markets are crashing, so maybe that $55 million of bonds is now worth only $45 million.) But it's pretty good, particularly if, as is often the case, the borrower is handing over U.S. Treasury bonds. In a sense, having U.S. Treasury collateral for your loans is as good as a government guarantee.****, In any case, you get collateral worth more than what you lend. The difference is called the haircut, and it's what makes repo feel safe. Typical haircuts range from 2 percent for U.S. Treasuries to 5 to 15 percent for stocks., There's plenty of bilateral repo, which is just people with money largely big Wall Street banks lending to people with securities other banks and hedge funds directly. And then there is tri-party repo, which is a coordinated market run by two banks, J.P. Morgan Chase and Bank of New York Mellon., In this market, many of the people looking for a place to put their cash are money market funds (more on them later), and the borrowers are mostly Wall Street banks and some big hedge funds. It's tri-party because, besides the lender and the borrower, there's JPMorgan or BoNY in the middle of each trade as the custodian, which means that those two banks hold onto all the money and all the securities, and keep track of all the accounts., In other words, tri-party repo market is an enormous series of entries into the computer systems at Bank of New York and JPMorgan, to the tune of $1.9 trillion of loans outstanding every day. It's the plumbing by which Wall Street banks and hedge funds get short-term funding to finance their investments, and by which money market funds and other cash investors invest their money., Well, one way they invest their money. Another is commercial paper. Commercial paper, or CP, is kind of boring. It's just lending money to companies for a short time. For the companies, it's like issuing bonds, only instead of borrowing at a fixed rate for 5-10 years, they borrow at a fixed rate for, like, a week., The companies that issue commercial paper are disproportionately banks and other financial firms. Nonfinancial companies companies that make things other than money account for under 20 percent of the more than $1 trillion of commercial paper outstanding., So: CP is kind of like big bank deposits? Instead of putting $200 in the bank and being able to withdraw it at any time, you put $20 million in the bank and get it back with interest in a week or whatever., Why buy CP if you're worried about banks? The answer is mostly that you wouldn't, but your money market fund would. You, Ellen, probably don't invest your spare cash directly in the tri-party repo or commercial paper markets, and neither do most corporate treasurers. But you may, and they do, invest your spare cash in money market funds. If you have a retirement account, and you think some of the money in that account is in cash, chances are it's actually in a money market fund., Money market funds are the gateway drug of shadow banking. They're mutual funds pools of people's money that invest in short-term, cash-like instruments. Some of them are limited to government bonds, but others invest in what we've been talking about. Repos. Commercial paper. Here is a list of holdings of one money market fund; note the preponderance of Repurchase Agreement and Financial Company Commercial Paper among its holdings., Money market funds are like bank accounts, but often with higher yields, and with a diversification benefit: instead of putting all your money in one bank that might fail, you're putting it in a pool of money that buys the commercial paper of lots of banks (as well as repos), which are unlikely to fail all at once., In these shadow banking markets, savers people who put their money in money market funds, corporate treasurers, what have you are lending money to hedge funds and banks to finance their purchase of long-term investments like loans, stocks and bonds. The savers have more or less ready access to their money, and more or less don't make individual credit decisions themselves. The intermediaries money-market funds, hedge funds, banks, others make the investing decisions. The ultimate borrowers corporations, mortgage borrowers, etc. get long-term money., So there's an extra step or two, but shadow banking is a lot like, just, banking., With an important difference: banking is a highly regulated beast.***** Shadow banking, not so much. Recent proposals to increase money market fund regulation have been met with howls of protest. And money market funds are relatively more regulated than lots of other shadow-banking bits., This suggests one other reason why you might end up putting your money in a shadow bank than in a regular bank: the shadow bank is having more fun. It can offer a higher yield, lure you with promises (possibly true!) of greater safety, and just generally operate with lower levels of regulatory interference than a regular bank. But when things go bad in the shadow banking world, without deposit insurance or other protections, they tend to go even worse than they would in the banking world., This kind of sets a limit on bank regulation. If you want to increase bank regulation, you have to consider not only is this a good idea but also will this drive people from banks to shadow banking, and if so, will it end up making the system as a whole riskier instead of less risky? If the answer is yes, you may find that you prefer banks as they exist to the shadowy things that might replace them. , * If you'd like a sophisticated and entertaining discussion of what banks do, try this delightful Interfluidity post. Here is another good, very classical explanation of banking., ** Here you will find prevailing GC repo rates, which are around 0.20 0.25%. That's per year. So in the example in the text, I pay you back $50,000,273.97 ($50mm + [$50mm x .002 x 1/365]). Congratulations, you made $273.97 in interest on your $50 million! But it adds up; there's some $300bn of DTCC GCF repo traded each day. , *** And then you give me back the $3,999,726.03 that you have left over after selling the bonds and taking back your cash with interest, in theory. In practice we just sue each other forever. , **** In the narrow sense of ignoring interest rate risk, whatever. Incidentally, this description of collateral as serving the function for shadow banking that deposit insurance serves for regular banking is motivated by the work of Zoltan Pozsar, among others. Basically if you find an economics paper about things like the safe asset shortage, collateral velocity, or shadow banking, it's going to be delightful. I mean, if you like that sort of thing. But here you are in footnote ****** of a post about shadow banking so, y'know, what does that say about your tastes? , ***** I know, you think: not regulated enough! And you might be right: modern banks are more or less creatures of the state, so the state has a significant interest in meddling in their affairs, and different people think the current level of meddling is too high, too low, or very rarely just right.
The oldest of the baby boomers came of age in the 1960s and are beginning to retire. Their younger cohorts are still putting kids through college and building careers. Baby boomers are a giant portion of the population 78 million people, by one estimate., They grew up in an era of rising living standards, but the Great Recession destroyed any sense of financial security and many nest eggs. Financial planner Tim Maurer outlines a variety of issues boomers face., Who is a baby boomer, and what defines their financial situations?, The age range is vast anyone from 48 to 67 so we're really talking about a couple of generations within the baby boomer generation. Some of them are now in retirement. Their kids are out of the house. And some of them are still in the thick of getting kids through college in their peak expense years, but also their peak income-earning years. And obviously this is all taking place within one of the most confounding periods of time in financial history. There's an awful lot of confusion, a lot of market volatility and economic uncertainty, so a lot of questions on that front., How much income can be generated in retirement? , We're really looking at three different sources [of income]. If they're one of the few who still have a pension, that would be a great benefit. Then they will also have some sort of Social Security. The baby boomer generation is expecting quite a deal from Social Security, actually. Some of them will be getting up to $2,400 per month of income from Social Security. And then they have their retirement savings., An easy way of getting an idea of how much income your retirement savings can generate is that you add it all up and you multiply it by .04. That is the equivalent of 4 percent, which would be a reasonable rate of return that you can expect to take out of your investment dollars. If you take the pensions, add the Social Security and add 4 percent of the retirement savings that they currently have, that will give them a good idea of what they can reasonably generate in terms of income today., Adult population, 25 and older.Highlighted bars show the ages of the people born during the peak years of the baby boom., Source: 2010 Census, Credit: Alyson Hurt / NPR, What are their immediate financial issues?, The baby boomers truly are our first sandwich generation, where they have concerns of their parents, who are still living, possibly having to help fund them in their old age. We're also talking about the expectation of baby boomers: This is the first generation that was expected to put their kids through school. ... Many of them did take on the financial obligations for their children's education., What kinds of investments should boomers be in?, Boomers have really [ridden] the roller coaster of the market because they grew up professionally in the 1980s; 1982 to 2000 was the longest bull market stretch that we've ever seen in this country. And so they grew up basically believing that if they just plowed money into the market, it was going to make all of their dreams come true. From 2000, 2001, 2002 the three-year stretch where the bubble burst in the tech market and 9/11 hit I think that they were all scared. If they were scared in those three years, 2008 really scared them into a cocoon, and they never wanted to come out again. And just over the course of the last several weeks was the [Dow Jones industrial average] reaching 14,000. So if they just did hang on for the ride throughout all of that volatility, now is the time when I'm saying to them, 'It is time to put together a truly diversified, more conservative, balanced portfolio that will be able to provide you with income throughout your retirement.' , Is this a generation on top of estate planning?, The generation is not, but I think few generations are. I think what's important about estate planning for baby boomers is now they are actually glimpsing needing to utilize these documents with a higher degree of probability. In other words, baby boomers are possibly glimpsing down the road when they will be leaving this Earth, and it makes the will that much more important, but because they have assets, because they have concerns about health care. It also makes the powers of attorney and the advanced directive, the living will document and the health care power of attorney all the more important as well. They should also be thinking of their parents, who are still alive, and that imminent need for their estate planning documents to be completed.
The government-controlled mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac announced today that they would try to merge some of the operations the two companies currently perform separately., The Wall Street Journal reports:, Edward DeMarco, the director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency, said the agency would begin forming a new company that would consolidate some of the 'back-office' functions currently replicated individually by each firm. The new company will have its own chief executive and board and for now would be jointly owned by Fannie and Freddie, said Mr. DeMarco, in a speech Monday afternoon before the National Association of Business Economics in Washington, D.C., Fannie and Freddie have operated for decades as independent firms in competition with each other, but last year the FHFA began working with the companies to create a single platform in which home loans could be packaged into securities. The companies were taken over by the U.S. Treasury in 2008 and the FHFA was tasked with conserving the firms' assets until Congress and the White House decided what to do with them., The two firms help finance about two-thirds of U.S. home loans. Reuters reports:, Since they were seized by the government, the companies have drawn nearly $190 billion from the U.S. Treasury to stay afloat., By creating a new securitization company, FHFA intends to pave the way for a single securitization platform, forcing Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to abandon their current separate systems. DeMarco said the goal is to build a single infrastructure to support the mortgage credit business., Essentially, the Journal explains, what's happening here is a winding-down of sorts. The third company will begin packaging and selling mortgage securities and then government can then decide what it wants to do with the new company., What we are trying to do...is to ease the transition from where we are today to wherever lawmakers decide the country ought to ultimately go, DeMarco said.
Two recent tallies of the world's richest people agree on the broad points but not on which continent has the most billionaires. Here, U.S. dollars are counted, with Chinese yuan notes in the background., Two recent tallies of the world's richest people agree on the broad points but not on which continent has the most billionaires. Here, U.S. dollars are counted, with Chinese yuan notes in the background., There are more than 1,400 billionaires in the world right now, according to two sources one in the U.S., and one in China. But the tallies by Forbes and Hurun Report differ on key points, including whether there are now more billionaires in Asia than anywhere else., Forbes says its list of billionaires, released Monday, now boasts 1,426 names, with an aggregate net worth of $5.4 trillion, up from $4.6 trillion. Shanghai's Hurun Report, which compiled its first global list this year after long tracking China's wealthy, says it found 1,453 billionaires, with $5.5 trillion in combined worth., Those numbers aren't far from each other, especially considering recent volatile economic conditions in global markets. And they show that the amount of money held by fewer than 1,500 people let's split the difference, and call it $5.45 trillion would earn them a spot as the world's fourth-largest GDP, if we were the type of people who conflate producing wealth with holding onto it., Both of the lists are topped by Carlos Slim Helu and his family, of Mexico. And they agree that the U.S. has more billionaires than any other country., But a key difference between the lists arises when Hurun Report states, Asia was home to the highest number of billionaires this year with most of them operating in real estate sector., Forbes says the entire Asia-Pacific region has 386 billionaires, while the Hurun list says Asia has 559 of them not including the 17 who are in Oceania., So, why the disparity? It could certainly come down to fluctuations in individuals' net worth Forbes cites Brazil's Eike Batista, whose fortune dropped by $19.4 billion, or equivalent to about $50 million a day, in 2012., The differences might also reflect the difficulty of tallying the wealth of people whose holdings are often spread across continents and industries. And not all of them want to advertise their wealth particularly in China, which Hurun Report says has 317 billionaires., As The Vancouver Sun reported yesterday, China's wealthy use many means to smuggle their money overseas, hoping to insulate themselves from both the tax office and political shifts., Citing Global Financial Integrity's estimate that $602.9 billion fled China in 2011, The Sun's Zoe McKnight writes that the methods ranged from using underground banks to putting suitcases full of cash on airplanes., For every billionaire that Hurun Report has found, the magazine company's chairman Rupert Hoogewerf says, I estimate we have missed at least two, meaning that today there are probably 4000... billionaires in the world., The magazine concluded that valuing the wealth of China's richest is as much an art as it is a science.
Florida Atlantic University says it's standing by its deal to sell naming rights to its new football stadium to a controversial private prison company. The Boca Raton-based GEO Group faces allegations of abuse and neglect at some of its facilities, and there's a growing call on campus for the school to sever its ties., Normally, when a school announces a multimillion-dollar donation, it's met on campus with cheers. But at FAU, a public university, the news that the Owls football team would soon be playing in GEO Stadium was met by many with incredulity and outrage. The new stadium was quickly dubbed Owlcatraz., But school President Mary Jane Saunders said she was delighted by the $6 million deal. This gift is a true representation of The GEO Group's incredible generosity to FAU and the community it serves, she said in a press release when the deal was announced Feb. 19., At a meeting Friday with students, faculty and community members, Saunders went even further., I think that the gift that was given was a gift given with love, she said., The Halo Effect, GEO has long had connections with FAU. The company's chairman, George Zoley, has two degrees from the school and has served as chairman of the board of trustees., Friday, some 250 people mostly opponents of the deal jammed into a meeting room at the stadium. Saunders tried to make her case., It was from an alum. It was from a local company. It's from a company that we have dealings with. And it's a company that wanted to give a philanthropic gift to an institution they love, she said., Outside the stadium, students made it clear they don't see the deal as selfless philanthropy, chanting, It's not worth the price., GEO didn't give us a gift. We gave GEO a gift that they can use to lobby the government so that they can have more privatized facilities, says FAU senior Rory Padgett. This goes directly against what the university stands for., William Drennan, an associate law professor at Southern Illinois University, has studied the business of selling naming rights. He says for a company like GEO Group, this deal has special appeal., The particular benefit of this type of advertising is the halo effect getting your name, getting your brand associated with a prestigious university, he says., Company Under Fire, GEO group is a successful company, but it's had a string of allegations of abuse at institutions it has run. Some of the most notable came at a juvenile prison in Mississippi, which a federal judge called a cesspool of unconstitutional and inhuman acts and conditions., GEO hasn't responded to requests for comment, but in earlier statements it contends the abuses mostly occurred before the company took over the juvenile prison., Here in Florida, many are also concerned about GEO's role in operating an immigration detention center in Pompano Beach, just a few miles from the FAU campus. At Friday's meeting, Arely Baugh said she became a student at FAU because she was impressed by the school's diversity., And as a Mexican immigrant in this country, it really saddens me to know that my school, which I'm proud of, is tying allegiance to a group that affects my people, she says., A 'Closed Book'?, To the students, faculty and community members, Saunders admitted that she doesn't know a lot about GEO's record operating state and federal prisons. But still, she expressed confidence in the company., I've been assured that the company runs very good facilities and that the company inherited some facilities that were poorly run. And some of the besmirching of the GEO name came from that, she said., As for the naming rights deal with GEO, Saunders said, It's a closed book. She said the university followed all its procedures in evaluating the deal and has signed a binding contract with the private prison company., On campus, though, students and faculty members say opposition to the deal is just getting started.
French workers burn tires outside the Goodyear tire factory in Amiens, France, on Tuesday, after Titan CEO Maurice Taylor criticized French workers in a letter addressed to Industrial Renewal Minister Arnaud Montebourg., French workers burn tires outside the Goodyear tire factory in Amiens, France, on Tuesday, after Titan CEO Maurice Taylor criticized French workers in a letter addressed to Industrial Renewal Minister Arnaud Montebourg., The battle between an American capitalist and a French socialist official has prompted chuckles and heated debate on both sides of the Atlantic. The exchange highlights some humorous stereotypes and reveals real differences between the economic cultures of France and the United States., A leaked letter from Maurice Taylor, CEO of the Illinois-based Titan tire company, ignited the controversy. In it, Taylor, regarded by the French as a hardcore capitalist, addressed Arnaud Montebourg, France's flamboyant, leftist industrial renewal minister., Taylor wrote that he was no longer thinking about buying an ailing Goodyear tire plant in northern France, saying it would be stupid to buy a facility where workers were paid for seven hours but toiled for only three, spending the rest of the time on lunch and coffee breaks. He also told the minister what he thought about French workers when he visited the plant., Titan CEO Maurice Taylor, shown here in 2009, is known as a tough negotiator and an outspoken free-market capitalist., Titan CEO Maurice Taylor, shown here in 2009, is known as a tough negotiator and an outspoken free-market capitalist., I noticed that when you get to a machine and you're working, you work real good, you work as fine as any place, and you make a great product, Taylor said in an interview on the BBC. But half the time, you guys are walking around, having discussions. It reminds me of a beauty parlor. You got to work a full six hours, you're being paid for seven. And the union president stands up to me and says, 'That is the French way, Mr. Taylor.' , Taylor called French unions crazy and said he'd open a factory in China, pay workers a fraction of French salaries and export those tires back to France., The letter provoked a firestorm in France when it was published in the French daily Les Echos. In his written response, Montebourg called Taylor's proposal extremist and insulting., If Titan's tires are imported to France, Montebourg threatened, he would make sure they're inspected with particular zeal. The epistolary war was entertaining, but it also struck a nerve in France., 'We Want To Work', On Tuesday, workers at the ailing Goodyear tire plant in Amiens came out in protest, angry about how they'd been portrayed in the media., France's socialist Minister for Industrial Renewal Arnaud Montebourg, shown here on Feb. 18, responded strongly to Taylor's criticism., David Mera said he and other workers are not lazy. He remembered Taylor's visit vividly and described him as walking with a cowboy swagger. Taylor visited a wing of the plant that was at half capacity, Mera said., We want to work more. Many of us have worked hard here 10, 20 and 30 years. We have families to support, Mera said. But Goodyear took orders away from us and is investing in factories in China., Goodyear reduced capacity at the Amiens plant five years ago when workers refused to accept layoffs. But workers questioned why jobs should be cut while the company remained highly profitable., Among this crowd of workers, the boss is evil, always looking to exploit them. Many workers wore T-shirts reading Hoodlum Bosses. Taylor fits that bill perfectly, said Michael Wamen, head of the plant's General Confederation of Labor union., He has no scruples, Wamen said. He made a fortune, has private jets and yachts and yet he wants to produce his tires in China at one euro an hour. ... Maybe soon he'll be able to get his tires made for 30 cents an hour by children in Bangladesh., As they headed for lunch in front of Amiens town hall, workers said they don't earn big salaries: between $18,000 and $30,000. Most blamed globalization for their plight., Challenges For The French Model, The letter exchange leaves one to wonder whether the cherished French employment model can survive in a globalized world., The episode has been an embarrassment for French President Francois Hollande, who is struggling with a high unemployment rate and an image that France is an unfriendly place for business. It's not the first time Montebourg, the young, firebrand minister of industrial renewal, has caused him headaches with international investors., Jean-Gilles Malliarakis, an economist and publisher, says Montebourg is absolutely a demagogue. He says it's all about politics and claims Montebourg leaked Taylor's letter to become a hero of the far left., As the Goodyear workers stacked up and set fire to an enormous pile of tires, one couldn't help but notice the Dunlop plant next door, also owned by Goodyear, humming in process without any problems. Dunlop workers have five weeks of vacation and good benefits., Apparently, the difference is that instead of confrontation, unions and higher-ups there worked out an agreement. The unions agreed to work longer, more difficult hours. In return, Goodyear agreed to invest $50 million in the plant to keep it running.
Formerly known as clearance., Formerly known as clearance., Last year, J.C. Penney saw what every big retailer had been seeing for years: the threat of Amazon and other new competitors rising to destroy their business., So J.C. Penney brought in a bold new CEO. Ron Johnson had already created Apple Store, a chain of physical stores where people flocked to shop. Before that, he had revamped Target., And Johnson had a plan for J.C. Penney: Tell customers they don't have to spend time anymore clipping coupons or waiting for sales to happen. Instead, the store would offer fair prices on its merchandise every day., He sort of said sales were akin to drugs, and he was trying to wean customers off drugs, says retail analyst Rafi Mohammed., It didn't work. The old customers really did love clipping coupons and waiting for sales., I come home and I cry over it, and my husband's looking at me, like, 'What's wrong?' says Carol Vickery, who shopped at the store in Tallahassee, Fla. I said, 'Penney's doesn't have sales anymore. I need my store back!' , The company redesigned its stores to try to make J.C. Penney a destination for a younger, hipper crowd. There are boutiques within the store featuring individual designers. But the new crowd hasn't shown up yet., This week, J.C. Penney announced that its sales in the last three months of the year were down about 30 percent from the previous year., Now, the company is backing off its bold strategy a bit, and reintroducing sales and some coupons for shoppers in its loyalty program. But they won't be called coupons. They'll be called gifts.
Yahoo's sweeping edict against telecommuting has been felt as a personal attack by some of the two-thirds of Americans who regularly work from home., Lawyer Shannan Higgins of Washington, D.C., finds one line of the company memo outlining the policy change particularly offensive: Speed and quality are often sacrificed when we work from home., For nearly a decade, Higgins has worked one day a week from the basement office in her rowhouse, where she takes pride in her work and is obsessed with efficiency., It's a huge morale booster to be given that flexibility, she says. But it also, I think, conveys a sense of trust, and that we're adults., On a recent morning Higgins was still in yoga pants, hair uncombed signs of precious time saved. This makes getting her two kids to school a bit less chaotic. Then there's the serious money saved by forgoing a dog walker, downtown parking and lunch out. And her home office is conveniently located next to the washer and dryer., This is my son's bedspread, she explains, pulling it out of the dryer. The cat got sick last night. So rather than have it sit around all day with nastiness on it ... She trails off as her hands fly, folding the rest of the load., Higgins also found the Yahoo memo hypocritical. Company CEO Marissa Mayer, a new mother, has paid to build a nursery right next to her executive suite, something Higgins says few women have the money or clout to do. And yet, as a feminist studies major, Higgins admits she is torn over the biting reaction to Mayer's ban on telecommuting., It feels yucky to me to hear this story, she says. I'm not happy with it. But on the other hand, if she were a man, I think the tone would be slightly different., When Does The Workday End?, In New York, lawyer and mother of three Rebecca Hughes-Parker has worked part time at home for eight years. She found the Yahoo memo condescending., This kind of policy goes backwards in time, she says, to when you really had to be chained to a desk and didn't have the flexibility to run to a child's doctor's appointment, answer emails on the way if you had to, and then come back. I think it's very scary for people to think those things are going to be taken away from them., Like everyone interviewed for this piece, Hughes-Parker says of course she understands that face time is essential now and then. And sure, Yahoo's telecommuting ban may be just what's needed in a time of crisis. But she resents the implication that she's slacking off when her boss can't see her and wonders whether society should resurrect all the barriers between work and home., One of the things I thought when I read the memo, Hughes-Parker says, laughing, [was] 'Well, if these people aren't allowed to work from home, does that mean they don't have to answer emails at night?' , Value Of Workplace Flexibility, A recent University of Iowa survey found those who work at home put in five to seven hours more time a week., In fact, Yahoo's move defies a larger trend. Businesses and public agencies are pushing telecommuting for all kinds of reasons, from saving money to reducing traffic. Last year, Australia's prime minister committed to having 12 percent of that country's public service regularly telework by 2020. What's more, surveys show the youngest generation of workers values flexibility even more than money., I think there's a lot of disappointment, says work-at-home father Scott Behson, who runs the blog Fathers, Work and Family, where he has registered dismay over the ban. He also teaches management at Fairleigh Dickinson University. Behson says the only good thing about Yahoo's move is the backlash to it., I'm encouraged by how much media attention this has gotten, he says, and that there's been, in many quarters, a kind of questioning of this decision, showing that maybe the time is right for full public debate on the value of workplace flexibility., In the long run, Behson doesn't think Yahoo's telecommuting ban will survive that debate.
Chrysler's 2014 Jeep Grand Cherokee., Chrysler's 2014 Jeep Grand Cherokee., There's major business news in Indiana today:, Chrysler will hire 1,250 new workers and spend $374 million to upgrade transmission plants in central Indiana the only place in North America where the automaker makes transmissions, the Detroit Free Press reports from Kokomo., The Associated Press says Chrysler is investing millions in the Kokomo area to build fuel-efficient eight- and nine-speed automatic transmissions. Chrysler plans to use a new nine-speed transmission in the Jeep Cherokee midsize SUV and in the Dodge Dart compact. The Cherokee will replace the aging Jeep Liberty later this year., As NPR's Sonari Glinton reported back in December 2011, Fiat came to Chrysler's rescue after the American company filed for bankruptcy and, despite some bumps along the way, the Italian car maker has helped Chrysler to focus on products and financial stability. ... [And] after its bankruptcy, Chrysler repaid nearly $8 billion in bailout loans it got from the Canadian and U.S. governments.
It's not much of a change, but at least it's in the right direction., The Bureau of Economic Analysis reported Thursday morning that it now thinks the economy grew at a 0.1 percent annual rate in fourth-quarter 2012. A month ago, BEA thought GDP shrank at a 0.1 percent annual rate in those last three months of the year., Obviously, in an economy that now produces nearly $16 trillion worth of goods and services annually, a 0.2 percentage point revision is basically a blip., But, the revision does mean that GDP has technically, at least grown for 14 consecutive quarters. Growth slowed sharply as the year ended, however, from a 3.1 percent pace in the third quarter. Economists have put some of the blame on superstorm Sandy, which hit New York, New Jersey and surrounding states hard in late October., According to Reuters, a slightly better performance than first thought in exports and fewer imports led to the fourth-quarter GDP revision., Also Thursday morning, the Employment and Training Administration said there were 344,000 first-time claims for jobless benefits last week. That was down 22,000 from the week before. Bloomberg News thinks that shows companies were looking beyond looming government spending cuts and maintaining staffing.
Plaintiffs accuse Anheuser-Busch of misleading consumers about the alcohol content in Bud Light, Budweiser and other products. The brewer denies the claims., Plaintiffs accuse Anheuser-Busch of misleading consumers about the alcohol content in Bud Light, Budweiser and other products. The brewer denies the claims., Update at 7:35 p.m. ET: Beer Is At Full Strength, Tests Say, Samples of Budweiser and other Anheuser-Busch InBev beers were found to be in line with their advertised alcohol content, according to lab tests conducted at NPR's request. We've rewritten portions of this post to reflect that new information., Anheuser-Busch is accused of misleading beer drinkers about the alcohol content of Budweiser and other products, in a series of class-action lawsuits filed in federal court., We're alleging that Anheuser-Busch systematically waters down its products, says Josh Boxer, lead attorney for the plaintiffs., The brewer says the case has no merit., Like many mainstream U.S. beers, Budweiser has long been accused of tasting watery and low-powered in comparison with strong and flavorful American craft and European traditional brews. But the lawsuit's main contention is not that a crime against taste has been committed., The plaintiffs allege intentional mislabeling of at least 10 beers' alcohol content, after the brewer added water to boost the amount of beer produced from raw materials. They are seeking compensation for consumers., How would you feel if you paid premium prices for premium gas and were told that in fact, they were giving you the low-grade gas? Boxer asks., The lawsuit doesn't cite independent tests of the beers in question. Boxer says his information comes from former Anheuser-Busch employees., Peter Kraemer, Anheuser-Busch InBev's vice president of brewing and supply, calls the claims completely false in an emailed response to the lawsuit. Our beers are in full compliance with all alcohol labeling laws, Kraemer says., Tests conducted on Budweiser, Bud Light Lime, and Michelob Ultra this week by San Diego's White Labs found that the alcohol percentages inside the cans were the same as what was stated on the can, says analytical laboratory specialist Kara Taylor., Some of them were spot-on. Others deviated, plus or minus, within a hundredth of a percentage well within federal limits, she says., Laboratory analysis of Budweiser found the beer was within federal rules in matching its advertised 5 percent alcohol content by a hundredth of a percentage., When told that a lab commission by NPR had tested several Budweiser samples and found them to match their labeled alcohol content, Boxer dismissed our test results, confident that when he gets his hands on Anheuser-Busch's internal testing, he'll still have a strong case., On Twitter and other social media, news of the lawsuit was greeted by jeers and jokes about watered-down beer. But the practice of adding water to beer before it's packaged is common among large brewers. Called high-gravity brewing, it involves blending a potent brew with water., The process is very efficient and it can mean higher profits for companies like Anheuser-Busch InBev, the world's largest brewer., In high-gravity brewing, you can make a lot more beer by stretching the beer that you have fermented, explains Dan Kopman, co-founder of Schlafly Beer, a craft brewery in Anheuser-Busch's ancestral home of St. Louis. (AB InBev is now headquartered in Belgium.), Kopman says that adding water can help a brewer stretch the amount of the final product by at least 5 or 10 percent without changing the beer's flavor., This is primarily done in very large breweries, and it works well for lighter lager beers, he tells The Salt. I would assume that all major brewers in the world high-gravity brew. It is not unique to AB., As an example, Kopman says, Anheuser-Busch might brew high-gravity Bud, with an alcohol content of around 5.5 percent after fermentation., Then in packaging they will add deaerated water, he says, to achieve the desired flavor and alcohol content. Deaerated water has low oxygen levels, to help the beer keep on the shelves., Brewers who use this process monitor alcohol content closely; most also verify it with a lab test after packaging., The class-action suit accuses Anheuser-Busch of purposefully deceiving consumers, and claims that the practice of watering down beer was vigorously accelerated after Anheuser-Busch merged with InBev to form a mammoth global corporation in 2008., Two plaintiffs in the California suit, Nina Giampaoli and John Elbert, say they regularly purchased Budweiser over the past four years, taking the stated percentage of alcohol into account when they decided to buy the beer., But Todd Alstrm, the founder of BeerAdvocate, says that while consumers want to know roughly how much alcohol is in a beer, the case is silly., I don't think it truly matters with most people out there, he says.
Eat them whole or divide and conquer? That's the eternal question when it comes to Oreos, those little rounds of chocolate cookie hugging creme in the middle., Over the years, the marketing folks at Nabisco have issued some well-known directions on how to enjoy their beloved processed cookies: You can twist 'em, lick them, dunk 'em. Now, it seems, you can also use a robot to take a hatchet to them., In a new satirical video that's quickly making the rounds online, self-described physicist David Neevel (he's actually a copywriter with advertising agency Wieden + Kennedy) explains how he spent 0.04 years building the OSM that's short for Oreo Separator Machine a robotic device to carefully scrape the crme from the sides of the cookie., The four-minute video perfectly channels the intensity of a documentary, with Neevel narrating his herculean effort to rid the snack cookie of unwanted crme., As Neevel intones in a deadpan, One of the hardest things to overcome was to learn to build robots and make them work. But it was also difficult to keep my hands warm and the back of my neck warm., The video is part of Nabisco's Cookies Vs. Crme campaign to market Oreos, which turned 100 last year. Still, it struck us here at The Salt as a bit ironic that Nabisco should choose this time to advertise the scientific side of its iconic cookie., After all, the science of processed food is really mostly geared at seducing consumers' taste buds. And it has gotten a lot of scrutiny over the past week, following the publication of an excerpt from Salt Sugar Fat in the New York Times Magazine. The book, from Pulitzer Prize-winning journalist Michael Moss, explores how manipulating those three ingredients has become central to the success of the processed food industry. If you're curious, you can hear more from Moss' interview on Fresh Air Tuesday.
Most Americans are earning more money than their parents, according to a new study from Pew's Economic Mobility Project. But those gains don't tell the whole picture., Let's start with the good news. The Pew Charitable Trust study looked at actual pairs of children and parents. Around age 40, 83 percent of the children were earning at least a thousand bucks more than their parents were when they were 40., Economic growth over the last generation really has translated into income increases for many Americans, says Erin Currier, who directs Pew's economic mobility work., Having a four-year degree made you more likely to exceed your parents' income, according to the study. And African-Americans tended to be less likely to out-earn their forebears. The economic mobility study also looked at wealth, finding that about half of Americans had banked at least $5,000 more than their parents had at the same age., But there's bad news in this story. The Pew study only looked at absolute dollar gains in income and wealth. It did not look at where people stand on the economic ladder, or how that compares with their parents, Currier says., Sometimes you can see these big gains what look to be big gains, she says. But they don't necessarily help a person escape the economic place in which they began., If you're earning $1,000 more than your parents, but your parents only earned $15,000 a year, that's not going to escalate you into the middle class what we call social mobility., Another factor: The Pew study looked at entire households. These days, it often takes two incomes to surpass the one salary that was enough for the younger generation's parents. While 93 percent of dual-earner families made at least $1,000 more than their parents, 77 percent of single-earner families did so., Gregory Clark, an economics professor at the University of California, Davis, who studies social mobility, says he doesn't think people care about how much more they're earning than their parents. What matters, he says, is where your income ranks compared with other people in society., We can keep on producing statistics, he says, but it's not going to give us any insight into how to change social mobility, and what the real mechanisms of social mobility are., But on the bright side, at least most of us aren't earning less than our parents.
General Motors Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Dan Akerson., General Motors Chairman and Chief Executive Officer Dan Akerson., General Motors Co. said today that its Chief Executive Dan Akerson will not take a pay raise this year., Documents filed with the House Committee On Oversight and Government Reform showed that GM was asking the U.S. government to OK a $2.1 million raise for Akerson. The government still owns part of GM and when the automaker took a $49.5 billion bailout, it agreed to have executive pay approved by government., Today, GM was indignant in a statement saying those figures were false., Unfortunately, someone who obviously did not understand the compensation request leaked the information in a way that misrepresented the truth in order to score political points on the eve of a congressional hearing, GM said., That hearing, by the way, was focused on a report issued by a Special Inspector General for the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP). As we reported, the IG found that the Treasury failed to rein in executive pay at companies that received a government bailout., The Wall Street Journal adds:, The Inspector General, Christy Romero, detailed how GM lobbied for higher pay for senior executives, stating that Mr. Akerson lobbied outgoing Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner for relief from the pay restrictions imposed as conditions of the company's bailout., Ms. Romero reprised her criticism in this morning's House hearing, stating in her testimony that the Treasury should go back to its original position that executive pay at companies still on federal life supports should be limited to $500,000 a year except in unusual circumstances., As for Akerson's compensation: USA Today reports he is among the lowest paid CEOs of the Big Three automakers in Detroit. Ford's CEO got $29.5 in 2011., The Journal points out, however, that GM is seeking raises for 18 other executives.
Martin Gruenberg, Acting Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), testifies during a U.S. House Financial Services Committee hearing on Capitol Hill on June 19, 2012., Martin Gruenberg, Acting Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), testifies during a U.S. House Financial Services Committee hearing on Capitol Hill on June 19, 2012., Profits for U.S. banks skyrocketed in 2012, a report from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. finds today., According to Bloomberg, U.S. banks made $141.3 billion in net income last year. That is the second-best earnings on record. The best year was 2006, when banks reported $145.2 billion in earnings., The AP explains:, 'The improving trend that began more than three years ago gained further ground in the fourth quarter,' FDIC Chairman Martin Gruenberg said in a statement. Still, 'troubled loans, problem banks and bank failures remain at elevated levels, while growth in lending and revenue remains sluggish.', Banks with assets exceeding $10 billion drove the bulk of the earnings growth in the October-December period. While they make up just 1.5 percent of U.S. banks, they accounted for about 82 percent of the industry earnings., Those banks include Bank of America Corp., Citigroup Inc., JPMorgan Chase &amp; Co. and Wells Fargo &amp; Co. Most of them have recovered with help from federal bailout money and record-low borrowing rates., Bloomberg reports that the profits were broad with 60 percent of banks reporting increases from the previous year even as interest-income margins tightened.
Today's economic indicators all point up:, &mdash; New Home Sales: There was a 15.6 percent surge in sales of new homes in January from December, the Census Bureau and Department of Housing and Urban Development say. That was the biggest one-month gain in nearly 20 years, according to The Associated Press. At an annual rate of 437,000, the sales pace was the strongest since July 2008. The data are another in a series of signs in recent months that the previously weak housing sector is now one of the economy's bright spots., &mdash; Consumer Confidence: The shock effect caused by last year's fiscal cliff debate and this year's increase in payroll taxes apparently abated this month because consumer confidence rebounded, the private Conference Board says. Its widely watched consumer confidence index rose to 69.6 from 58.4 in January., &mdash; Bernanke Sees Growth: In the first of two days of congressional testimony this week, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke told lawmakers that even though economic growth paused in fourth-quarter 2012, available information suggests that economic growth has picked up again this year. According to the AP, Bernanke is basically saying that the Federal Reserve's low interest-rate policies are providing key support for an economy still struggling with high unemployment. And, he is signaling that the Fed's efforts to keep borrowing costs low will continue., Bernanke is also giving Congress a warning, though. The so-called sequester about $85 billion worth of automatic spending cuts that would begin to kick in this Friday would put a significant ... near-term burden on the [economic] recover, he says., Bernanke's prescription:, To address both the near- and longer-term issues, the Congress and the Administration should consider replacing the sharp, front-loaded spending cuts required by the sequestration with policies that reduce the federal deficit more gradually in the near term but more substantially in the longer run. Such an approach could lessen the near-term fiscal headwinds facing the recovery while more effectively addressing the longer-term imbalances in the federal budget., Wall Street seems to like what it's hearing today. Though stock markets overseas were down earlier today, the Dow Jones industrial average and other U.S. indexes are on the rise.
Oxfam's report card evaluates giants of the supermarket aisle on their commitment to social and environmental issues., Oxfam's report card evaluates giants of the supermarket aisle on their commitment to social and environmental issues., Do failing grades inspire more effort? Oxfam hopes so. The activist group on behalf of the poor has just handed out report cards to 10 of the world's top food companies, grading their commitments to protect the environment and treat people fairly., Oxfam doesn't grade on the curve, evidently. Every company flunked. But two European-based companies, Nestle and Unilever, were at least better than the others., Both companies have policies that are supposed to ensure that workers around the globe are treated fairly, for instance, and they're better than average at trying to limit greenhouse gas emissions. Nestle (Taster's Choice; Perrier) got especially high grades for its efforts to conserve water. Unilever (Lipton Tea; Hellman's mayonnaise) got extra credit for policies aimed at helping small farmers., Oxfam also assigned grades for how companies protect women's rights, contribute to climate change and provide information about their suppliers., Associated British Foods (Mazola corn oil; Twinings Tea) came in at the bottom of Oxfam's rankings, but Kellogg's (Pop Tarts) and General Mills (Cheerios, Yoplait) weren't much better., These grades, it should be noted, are based on official policies, not actual behavior. Neither Oxfam nor any other independent group has the resources to travel the globe to see firsthand how these policies are implemented on, say, tea plantations in remote corners of Sri Lanka and Mozambique., Oxfam calls its new campaign Behind the Brands. This strategy targeting companies that own popular consumer brands is increasingly popular among environmentalists and other groups devoted to social change. Jason Clay, a vice president of the World Wildlife Fund, laid out the reasons a couple of years ago in a TED talk., It comes down to what's practical, Clay said. We could try to convince millions of farmers to work differently. We could try to persuade billions of consumers to buy different products. But it's a lot easier to put pressure on a few dozen companies huge conglomerates that order commodities from every corner of the globe., Those companies are extraordinarily sensitive when it comes to the image of their consumer brands. They already have very specific rules for their suppliers when it comes to quality and safety. How about associating those brands with environmental quality and worker well-being?, Oxfam says it will be happy to revise its grades when companies improve their performance.
Wal-Mart is one of several large retailers that say an increase in the payroll tax may hurt U.S. sales in the months ahead., For Darden Restaurants, the company behind Olive Garden and Red Lobster, its earnings projections out last week were not pretty. Sales will fall, it said, and company CEO Clarence Otis called higher payroll taxes a headwind., After a two-year tax break, the payroll tax, which funds Social Security payments, went back up to 6.2 percent on Jan. 1. The 2-percentage-point increase is an extra $80 a month in taxes for someone earning $50,000 a year., Other companies, including Family Dollar and Burger King, are also blaming the payroll tax increase for hurting bottom lines. But some analysts say those charges are premature., I'm kind of skeptical that anybody can say that with much certainty yet, says Christopher Carroll, an economics professor at Johns Hopkins University. He says that while it's likely smaller paychecks will affect spending eventually, we just don't know yet., Payroll Taxes, Or General Uncertainty?, Indeed, recent trends are all over the map. Consumer sentiment surveys say we're feeling better about the economy, but unemployment is still high and gas prices have been rising steadily., In any given month, or any given quarter, the size of those other effects is likely to swamp just any one effect like the payroll tax, Carroll says., Wal-Mart is another company pointing to the payroll tax as one reason it expects slow sales ahead. Even so, spokesman Randy Hargrove says, to date, we're not seeing any measurable changes in our traffic patterns yet. But customers are talking about it, he added., But just about anything from weather to less inflation in food, to what's going on in Washington can change how shoppers spend, says Frank Badillo, senior economist with Kantar Retail., Americans still managed to buy more stuff last month, though the increase was a puny 0.1 percent. Sales started to slow toward the end of last year, before payroll taxes went back up. The issue, Badillo says, was general uncertainty., [Consumers] never pulled the plug on their spending, he says, but clearly all the talk out of Washington had an impact., Retailers Watching Closely For Signs, Still, the payroll tax remains target No. 1 for some retailers worried about their future. The industry's trade group, the National Retail Federation, released survey results last week that it says showed recent payroll tax changes were heavily swaying shoppers., Almost half of consumers, about 45 percent, say that they're going to spend less overall as a result of the new federal tax laws, says Kathy Grannis, an NRF spokesperson., Look closely at the survey, however, and it never actually used the words payroll tax anywhere in its questions. Instead, it asked about what it called the new Fiscal Cliff tax laws. Some economists are skeptical that many Americans have even noticed their lower take-home pay yet., At Wal-Mart, the company is watching closely and says it will lower prices if the payroll tax does change how its customers shop., And customers may cut back from, say, beef to chicken, says Hargrove., But that's still an if. Wal-Mart says it didn't see a noticeable jump in sales when payroll taxes were cut two years ago. In surveys, consumers said they were using the extra money to pay down debt. And if we never spent more to begin with, it's possible we might not cut our spending, either.
Oakland Mayor Jean Quan (center) and former Oakland Councilman Ignacio De La Fuente are registered for the Oakland City ID Prepaid MasterCard program by Jaime Suriano (left) Feb. 1 in Oakland, Calif., The city of Oakland, Calif., is taking a major step toward helping to bring many of its residents, especially illegal immigrants, out of the shadows., It will issue a municipal identification card to anyone who can prove residency., Oakland isn't the only city to issue such ID cards to illegal immigrants. New Haven, Conn., and San Francisco already do that., The Oakland card, however, has a unique feature it doubles as a debit card., In Oakland's predominantly Latino Fruitvale neighborhood, a group of day laborers are gathered for their weekly meeting. They talk about everything from overhauling immigration to keeping safe on the job. Then the conversation turns to the new city-issued identification cards and how to encourage people to apply for them., Mario Sandoval introduces himself to the group and tells them they should get an identification card especially for times when they have to deal with the authorities such as getting stopped by the police while driving. It's not a license, but at least they can identify themselves, he says., The ID card is marketed by a Venice, Calif.-based company, SF Global, in association with MasterCard and the Minnesota-based University National Bank., Having access to such a bank is important to Marcos Rodriguez, so that he doesn't have to carry large amounts of cash. Otherwise, he says, he's easy pickings for bad guys., Sometimes they've got knives or gun in their hands, Rodriguez says. You know, that happened to me like several times. ... They stole my money and they beat me up, you know, and it's really, really hard for some of us., Day laborers can be easy targets for thieves who know they carry cash instead of depositing wages in the bank. Day laborers most of the time are seen as walking ATMs, because they get robbed on the street, says Gabriela Galicia, who works with day laborers at Street Level Health Project, a nonprofit that serves the undocumented and uninsured., Galicia's group is part of a coalition that's trying to get the word out about the city ID card. The project has been in the works for more than two years., Oakland Mayor Jean Quan says the card can help people anytime they deal with a city agency, be it the police or the public library. And the debit feature is important for people who have no place to put their money., This debit function will allow them to put their money somewhere safe and to avoid some of the really, really huge fees that they charge at these check-cashing facilities in the Latino community or even the Asian community, Quan says., The ID card isn't free. It will cost $15 for adults and $10 for youths and seniors. There are also additional costs for depositing money in the debit account and for withdrawing funds, for example., Still, the ID card has its critics., It's one more way of having a de facto amnesty for illegal immigrants, says Mark Krikorian, who directs the Washington-based Center for Immigration Studies, a think tank favoring strict immigration controls., This kind of measure, along with, say, giving driver's licenses to illegal immigrants, helps integrate illegal immigrants into our institutions in a way that is simply inappropriate, Krikorian says., But Mayor Quan says the card isn't just for the undocumented. She sees it as a way to bring banking services to citizens and legal residents who are poor and unbanked., The city began accepting applications last week. The first cards will roll out in mid-March.
Despite its dark themes (slavery and the Civil War are hardly feel-good topics), Lincoln, like other Oscar nominees, has done very well at the box office. Disney has spent about $10 million campaigning for the best-picture prize, hoping for a payoff down the line., How much is a best-picture Oscar worth? Not the statuette winners are required to sell that back to the Academy for a buck if they want to get rid of it. No, what's the Oscar worth at the box office?, It's tricky to estimate, obviously, what with some pictures already on DVD when the contenders are nominated, and others just starting their theatrical runs. Still, this is a year where nominations appear to have made a difference, with a surprising number of popular nominees. Surprising because most of the best-picture selections were initially considered too dark to make much money., The pretty digital-tiger movie, for instance, is downright Darwinian; the comedy is about mental illness; the musical is actually called The Miserable Ones; the indie flick is about death and hurricanes, and the foreign film just about death., And then there are the dramas, about terrorism, slavery, terrorism and slavery. Dark, dark, dark. And everybody knows dark doesn't sell., Except that a record seven of the nine best-picture nominees have already passed the $100 million mark. And a bit more than a third of that cash has come in since the Oscar nominations weeks and even months after some of the films opened., That doesn't happen with most pictures, or even with most nominees. So the Oscar bounce appears to be bigger than usual this year though it's been purchased, let's note, at considerable expense. The Los Angeles Times estimates that Disney, which is hoping for its first best-picture win with Lincoln, has spent about $10 million campaigning for the award, presumably looking forward to a payoff not just at the box office but also in DVDs, streaming and other revenues later., Oscar-winning director William Friedkin once called the Oscars the greatest promotion scheme that any industry ever designed for itself, and the numbers suggest he wasn't overstating. By the time this year's statuettes are handed out, the nine best-picture nominees will together have sold more than a quarter of a billion tickets meaning that a lot more people than usual will know enough to enter their office Oscar pools. Small wonder Sunday's telecast is commanding record rates for ad time.
Brickell CityCentre is a new project that includes retail, offices and two condo towers. In all, some 19 condo towers are going up in downtown Miami, just seven years after the housing market crash., Brickell CityCentre is a new project that includes retail, offices and two condo towers. In all, some 19 condo towers are going up in downtown Miami, just seven years after the housing market crash., Here's a headline that may sound familiar: Miami is in the middle of a condo boom., Just seven years ago, Miami had a similar surge in condo construction. But it all came crashing down. There was an international banking crisis, and the Florida real estate bubble burst taking down investors and many developers., But new towers are once again reshaping the city's skyline., Peter Zalewski, a real estate consultant with Condo Vultures, says 19 condo towers are now in the works in Miami, with 7,000 total units., Ultimately there will probably be about 25 to 30 towers, probably close to 12,000 units that are all going to be announced or are in the planning stages, he says. But basically, South Florida is in the begging of its whole new condo boom all over again., Once again, much of downtown Miami is filled with construction equipment and workers., At the Brickell CityCentre project, excavators, augers, dump trucks and bulldozers are at work on a nine-acre site. It's the largest construction project under way in Florida., It's a mixed-use project that will include offices, retail space and at least two residential towers. Just blocks away, cranes are at work raising two other new residential projects., It's a remarkable comeback for developers and the construction industry in Miami, and there's one simple explanation: Miami never lost its international appeal, says Stephen Owens, president of Swire, the developer working on the CityCentre project., Like most developers, Swire got some bruises when the last condo boom crashed. When the music stopped in 2008, there were 22,000 residential units for sale in Miami an oversupply, Owens says, that many thought would last for decades., And here we are, he says, there are about 1,200 units of that original 22,000 that remain unsold. That says so much about the market., Appealing To Foreign Buyers, It's a market largely made up of foreign buyers Latin Americans, Europeans, Russians looking for a second home or an investment. When the market collapsed, those foreign buyers, mostly paying cash, snapped up many of the Miami condos at cut-rate prices., With foreign buyers in mind, developers in South Florida are now using a new financing model. They're requiring customers to put down 50 percent or more of the total cost before construction begins., It's the way residential projects have long been financed in Latin America, and with banks leery about financing new condos, it's now become the norm in Miami. That's how this condo boom in Miami differs from the last one., Development stopped and housing went unsold when the housing bubble in Miami popped., Development stopped and housing went unsold when the housing bubble in Miami popped., It does very much take out the speculator, Owens says. Even if there's a speculator out there, he's not going to tie up very many units at that level., With more money in the game, it's believed buyers will be less likely to walk away if the market turns down., And with many well-heeled foreign buyers ready to finance new condo projects throughout South Florida, developers are once again selling luxury living., At another new project, Marina Palms in North Miami, sales director Michael Internoscia takes customers through a just-completed sales center complete with a model 2,100-square-foot, two-bedroom unit. He shows off imported Italian cabinetry used in the kitchen and bathroom, plus top-line appliances and a heated toilet and bidet, complete with a remote control., Every detail was thought of when we designed the kitchens knowing what people would want, knowing what upscale would be, kind of what a five-star residence should look like, Internoscia says., 'Success Stories' Could Help The Boom Expand, Aiming at an even more exclusive market, some developers in South Florida are selling ultra-luxury living projects with car elevators and private pools on each terrace priced in the tens of millions., For now, it's a market made up almost entirely of international buyers. And for domestic buyers used to traditional home financing requiring a 50 to 80 percent down payment is a hard pill to swallow., But Anthony Burns, one of the developers of Marina Palms, says he thinks it's only a matter of time before this new boom convinces banks it may be safe to dip back into Miami's condo market., They've been licking their wounds for a long time from the crash that happened down here in Miami, he says. But nothing will get them back in the market faster than seeing the success stories of these first projects that are going up., If banks come back with financing and domestic buyers get back into the market, Miami's new condo rush could expand into the rest of Florida. This boom, developers say, is more sustainable than the last one, with better financial safeguards., But Burns says there's something else developers know: It's better to get in at the beginning of the boom than just before the bust.
Those baggage fees, cramped seats and tiny pretzel bags to the contrary and notwithstanding, airline passengers enjoyed good times in 2012, according to an annual recap from Airlines for America, the industry trade group., Last year was good because no U.S. commercial airline crashed, nearly 82 percent of flights arrived on time and only about three bags were mishandled for every 1,000 domestic passengers. Back in 2007, only 73.4 percent of flights were on time and seven bags were lost for every 1,000 travelers. Average fares ticked up, but only by a few dollars. Adjusting for inflation, domestic fares are actually down 15 percent from 2000., Unfortunately for airline shareholders, 2012 brought another profit nosedive., At a briefing today for journalists, John Heimlich, the group's chief economist, clicked through grim slides: Jet fuel hit a record $3.06-per-gallon average. In the 2001-2005 era, the price averaged roughly a dollar. Because of the big jumps in fuel prices, the carriers barely made money., U.S. airlines eked out another year of meager profitability as expenses grew faster than revenues with record-setting fuel prices serving as the primary driver, Heimlich said. Last year, the ten largest airlines reported a combined profit of $152 million, or just 21 cents per passenger. That compared with a profit of 77 cents per passenger in 2011, and $3.18 in 2010, he said., So far, 2013 isn't looking very encouraging: jet fuel was averaging $3.26 a gallon last week., And on March 1, the federal government will start enacting automatic spending cuts that could furlough air-traffic controllers and checkpoint security officers., Dan Elwell, the group's senior vice president, said the carriers have not yet gotten many details from the Transportation Department about what will happen as the cuts kick in, but he said he didn't think government officials would allow the budget process to hurt the already battered airline industry. Why? Because a healthy air transport system is too important, the optimist said.
Morning rush hour commuters pass by a CNBC crew in front of the New York Stock Exchange in September 2006. The channel has adopted a policy that prohibits guests from appearing on rival channels amid breaking news., Morning rush hour commuters pass by a CNBC crew in front of the New York Stock Exchange in September 2006. The channel has adopted a policy that prohibits guests from appearing on rival channels amid breaking news., CNBC is far and away the television ratings leader in the financial cable news business. Now, evidence arrives that its executives, producers and reporters are going to great lengths to maintain its status., The channel has adopted a policy that prohibits guests from appearing on rival channels amid breaking news if they want to be seen by CNBC's larger audience., The tension over the policy with one of its peers offers a window into the intensity of the cable battles over what's called booking landing interviews with key financial players, commentators, insiders and analysts., Every network should be trying to hustle to get content that's distinctive to their channel, said Andrew Morse, president of Bloomberg Television's U.S. operations. That's our job. We're in the news business., But Morse said Bloomberg doesn't try to dictate who can appear elsewhere., We want to talk to the newsmaker, Morse said. If there's news we also understand, though, that newsmakers need to get their information out. People aren't in the world of just consuming one source of news and information now., Politico was first to report the policy last week. CNBC's top spokesman initially denied to Politico that any such explicit policy existed. But a guest interviewed on CNBC earlier this month shared with NPR a copy of an email from a CNBC producer., It carried this warning in red:, CNBC POLICY REMINDER: Per CNBC policy, we cannot use guests who have a same-day appearance on Fox Business or Bloomberg...By accepting a booking with CNBC, you acknowledge and accept the terms of this policy., So much of broadcast news revolves around the booking with the pressure on the booker to land the guest., &ldquo; Bookers are a unique life form in the ecosystem of news gathering. They are often the snipers who sit waiting for their prey, drinking black coffee, smoking cigarettes and striking at the ideal moment., - Jonathan Wald, CNN executive producer, Bookers are a unique life form in the ecosystem of news gathering, said former top CNBC executive Jonathan Wald, now the executive producer of Piers Morgan Tonight on CNN. They are often the snipers who sit waiting for their prey, drinking black coffee, smoking cigarettes and striking at the ideal moment., Wald said that he has issued strict instructions that Morgan will not interview guests once they've appeared on certain other shows., You don't want to follow, Wald said, and so you'll do whatever you can to impress upon the guest ... the need to be on your show or your network first., Last October, CNBC's Julia Boorstin snagged a direct interview with Disney CEO Robert Iger as the company acquired LucasFilm for roughly $4 billion., She believed she had an exclusive and was witnessed berating Iger's team minutes later as he walked to speak live by satellite with an anchor for Bloomberg TV., Boorstin argued Iger could speak only to her network., Several former CNBC producers told me that policy reflects a heightened competition because of new players in financial news TV. Bloomberg Television has become a more serious player in competing for major interviews, and News Corp. launched Fox Business Network five years ago. Last year, News Corp. allowed a partnership between The Wall Street Journal and CNBC to lapse, though its reporters sometimes still appear on its air., CNBC had no official comment. But some executives there said Bloomberg reporters sometimes play fast and loose in claiming exclusives. Bloomberg's Trish Regan on Friday referred to an exclusive interview she had in speaking the evening before with billionaire investor Carl Icahn., But Regan's off-camera interview was less exceptional than advertised. Icahn had also been interviewed by a CNBC reporter that Thursday night, and he appeared live on CNBC that Friday., Privately, several CNBC executives ask: Why shouldn't they press their advantage with their new policy? After all, they said, they have a bigger television audience of investors, corporate executives, analysts and advertisers., Meanwhile, Bloomberg's Morse said he has taken to poking CNBC by slapping up a caption that says FIRST ON BLOOMBERG over an interview regardless of whether the guest has appeared elsewhere., The caption is literally true: It marks the first time that person appeared on Bloomberg TV that day., But that gibe is sure to fly over the heads of viewers and to drive rival news organizations nuts.
The Mille Lacs Band says it's putting profits from its casinos into a hotel venture in downtown St. Paul, Minn. The move is to diversify the tribe's business., The Mille Lacs Band says it's putting profits from its casinos into a hotel venture in downtown St. Paul, Minn. The move is to diversify the tribe's business., Nearly half of all Native American tribes across the country are benefiting from casinos and other gaming revenues. For most, it's their largest source of income. But growing threats to that revenue due to competition from non-Indian gaming are forcing many tribes to look for other investment opportunities., In a dramatic example of that diversification, one group of Native Americans is buying nearly half the hotel rooms in Minnesota's capital., A Big Business Shift, More than 18,000 slot machines create an orchestral blur of electronic entertainment at Grand Casino Mille Lacs. At the moment, it's not too crowded, allowing some patrons to play at two slot machines at the same time., The casino is one of two owned by the Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe in central Minnesota. Over the past two decades they've helped bring wealth and a return to self-sufficiency for this once impoverished Indian band. Now it's planning to grow its prosperity through a new business venture., Last month, the Mille Lacs Band announced plans to purchase two hotels in downtown St. Paul, Minn. Once the deal is finalized, the band will become the single largest hotel operator in the city., And this deal represents a big business shift for the band., Joe Nayquonabe, the commissioner of corporate affairs at the Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe, says Native American tribes are trying to diversify their source of revenue., Joe Nayquonabe, the commissioner of corporate affairs at the Mille Lacs Band of Ojibwe, says Native American tribes are trying to diversify their source of revenue., We'd love to see the Corporate Commission become a billion-dollar company someday, says Joe Nayquonabe, commissioner of corporate affairs., Nayquonabe, who heads the business side and turns profits over to the tribal government, says they'd like to own a hotel in every major U.S. market. By putting the casino's profits into a new hotel venture, he says, the band will become more economically secure., What Indian gaming has done for Indian tribes is it's helped us develop basic infrastructure for our tribal members, he says. So when you look around out here at the community, we have clinics, we have a government center, we have schools, we have community centers. Now we're starting to think about how do we improve the quality of life even more., Diversification Around The Country, Like the Mille Lacs Band in Minnesota, tribes around the country are looking to grow revenues., In Nebraska, the Winnebago tribe owns more than two dozen businesses that operate in several states and overseas through a holding company called Ho-Chunk Inc. Companies include everything from construction firms to a marketing and advertising company. In 2011, Ho-Chunk reported revenue topping $250 million., In Wisconsin, Kevin Allis chairs the Potawatomi Business Development Corp. a $60 million tribal holding company started in 2003 with profits from the tribe's downtown Milwaukee casino., He says they are occasionally funded from some of the profits that derive from the gaming facility., We're tasked with the obligation and responsibility to invest it in a wise manner to build the asset base of the tribe and also to insulate the tribe from any future decline in gaming dollars or something that would impact that industry, Allis says., He says the company invests in businesses all over the county, and the new mantra is to diversify., You can't rely on one thing, he says. It's never a safe bet to put all of your eggs in one basket. It's just not smart., Competition Threatens A Revenue Source, For many tribes, casinos are what have made just about any economic development possible, but it's a revenue source that's threatened., It's the growing presence of non-tribal gaming, says Anton Treuer, executive director of the American Indian Resource Center at Bemidji State University., He cites Minnesota lawmakers, who last year authorized a form of electronic gambling to help pay for the new Vikings football stadium., Gambling profits seem irresistible to politicians, and Treuer expects state governments to continue to seek them out to augment tax revenues., It becomes a little easier for both parties to kind of do an end-around on the tribal monopoly on gaming than it is to either make really hard cuts or raise taxes, Treuer says., Savvy tribal leaders say diversification is about preparing for whatever competition heads their way so their economic future isn't something left to chance.
A Walmart store in Paramount, Calif. in November of 2012., A Walmart store in Paramount, Calif. in November of 2012., The New York Times points out something rather interesting about an otherwise mundane business story. Wal-Mart's fourth-quarter earnings report tells the tale of how changes in the tax code has both helped corporations and hurt them., As the Times puts it, during the fourth quarter of last year, the tax code gave and the tax code took away., The paper explains:, The company reported higher-than-expected fourth-quarter earnings on Thursday of $1.67 a share, up from $1.51 a share a year ago, largely because of tax credits that brought its corporate tax rate lower than usual., But the recent payroll-tax increase and an Internal Revenue Service delay in processing tax returns hit consumers, and that affected the holiday period and sales in February. For the fiscal fourth quarter, which ended Jan. 31, sales at stores open at least a year rose 1 percent at Wal-Mart stores in the United States; analysts had expected a 1.7 percent increase., The earnings report today adds a bit of context to the internal emails published by Bloomberg last week., In them company executives worried about early February sales which Jerry Murray, Wal-Mart's vice president of finance and logistics, said were a total disaster., In another email Cameron Geiger, senior vice president of Wal-Mart U.S. Replenishment, wonders, Where are all the customers? And where's their money?, The official word from the earnings report, this morning, was less dire., According to CNN Money, Wal-Mart U.S. CEO Bill Simon told investors that the company was well aware that that payroll-tax increase was affecting its customers., Customers know about it and are adjusting, he said. We don't have a clear vision of how they'll continue to behave throughout the year.
A for sale sign in San Francisco last summer., A for sale sign in San Francisco last summer., Sales of existing homes rose 0.4 percent in January from December and were up 9.1 percent from January 2012, the National Association of Realtors reports., The trade group also says a seller's market is developing and home prices continue to rise., Bloomberg News writes that the news signals the housing sector is showing more momentum after enjoying its best year since 2007., The NAR's chief economist, Lawrence Yun, says in the group's report that:, Buyer traffic is continuing to pick up, while seller traffic is holding steady. In fact, buyer traffic is 40 percent above a year ago, so there is plenty of demand but insufficient inventory to improve sales more strongly. We've transitioned into a seller's market in much of the country., Still, Bloomberg also has some cautionary news to pass along:, Americans remain pessimistic about the economic outlook in February as rising gasoline prices compound the damage done by a higher payroll tax. The gap between positive and negative expectations was minus 7 this month, unchanged from January's three-month low, according to the Bloomberg Comfort Index., Earlier Thursday, there was word that inflation remained in check last month but that jobless claims rose last week., Also, the Conference Board said its leading economic index rose 0.2 percent in January. That's a sign the economy should keep growing in coming months.
Gasoline prices at a station in Encinitas, Calif., earlier this week., Gasoline prices at a station in Encinitas, Calif., earlier this week., Consumer prices were flat in January, the Bureau of Labor Statistics says. But a driving force behind that good news has reversed itself since then. According to BLS, gasoline prices fell 3 percent last month. In February, though, gas prices have risen sharply. So watch for next month's BLS report on consumer prices to tell a different story., Also this morning, the Employment and Training Administration reports that the number of first-time claims for jobless benefits rose by 20,000 last week, to 362,000. The increase was slightly larger than economists expected., For the most part, the number of weekly claims has stayed within a range of 350,000 to 400,000 since the fall of 2011. They've been another in a series of signs that the U.S. labor market is only slowly recovering from the 2007-09 recession.
Immigrants wait for their citizenship interviews at the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services on Jan. 29., Immigrants wait for their citizenship interviews at the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services on Jan. 29., With immigration policy in the news again, I asked three economists, Dream big: If you could create any immigration policy for the U.S., what would it be? Here's what they said., 1. The Best And The Brightest, Dean Baker of the Center for Economic and Policy Research would give out more visas to highly skilled workers: scientists, engineers, computer programmers and doctors., In this universe, with fewer low-skill immigrants, low-skilled labor would be more expensive. So, food would cost a bit more. Child care might, too. There could be fewer restaurants. On the other hand, having more doctors could mean that really expensive things like medical care would be cheaper., 2. The Highest Bidder, The problem with favoring highly skilled workers is defining highly skilled. Our government already tries to do that, and it's a mess, according to University of California, Davis, economist Giovanni Peri., In Peri's ideal world, the U.S. would auction the visas off to the employers who were willing to pay the most, he says. That way, employers could determine which would-be immigrants would add the most to the U.S. economy., Peri does think there should be space for low-skilled immigrants, so in his dream world, there would be separate visa auctions for high- and low-skilled workers., 3. Let 'Em In., Alex Nowrasteh, a self-described libertarian at the Cato Institute, says America should let almost everybody in., My dream setup would be a system where only criminals, suspected terrorists and those with serious communicable diseases like drug-resistant tuberculosis are barred from coming to the United States to live and work, Nowrasteh says., Open borders were the law of the land for almost 100 years of American history, he points out. He says between 50 million and 100 million people might move to the U.S. if those rules were reinstated now. He says that's fine. Compared with Europe, the U.S. is a big, empty country.
In-N-Out Burger has long been known for its secret menu, featuring options such as animal style fries, 3x3 burgers and Neapolitan milkshakes., In-N-Out Burger has long been known for its secret menu, featuring options such as animal style fries, 3x3 burgers and Neapolitan milkshakes., When you're trying to decide where to eat, knowing what's on the menu is important. But for restaurants trying to bring customers through the door, what's not on the menu is just as important., Secret menus aren't new. In-N-Out Burger has had one for years. But experts say more companies are now adding secret menu items, which are even catching on overseas in places like the United Kingdom and Singapore., Especially in this economy, restaurants want to set themselves apart. And in order to do so, they have to connect with customers., If you have a secret menu or if customers know the secret menu, they feel like they're insiders, says Bret Thorn, senior food editor of Nation's Restaurant News, a trade publication. They feel kind of a personal connection to the restaurant; they feel they know something that maybe not everybody else does. And everyone loves that., Nowadays, secret menus pretty much have the same items you'd find on a regular menu, just mixed up in a different way. But the menus make people feel like they're in on something. It's like they've become restaurant insiders, or like they've cracked some big code., The latest player to jump into the secret menu game is Panera Bread. Last month, the company rolled out six new items., One thing you won't see on Panera Bread's secret menu? Bread., As Scott Davis, who oversees menus for Panera Bread, explains, This is probably the most extreme anti-kind of Panera diet you can have, right? It doesn't include bread and flour and that sort of stuff., Davis says the company had been missing out on a whole group of diners: diabetics and people who were cutting carbs or avoiding gluten. This menu lets the company tap into that growing health-conscious market., If someone never considered Panera before because the name 'bread' is in it ... this is a way of opening that door, says Davis., So at its 1,800 stores around the country, Panera trained its employees to either pull out the secret menu card or scan a code that'll put the menu on a customer's mobile device., But only if someone asks for it., Davis says the reason they're doing it this way is because it saves money. According to him, It's a lot easier to execute, not having to go through the printing of all the collateral materials, and ultimately cluttering up the cafe with too many messages., There are no brochures or huge ad campaigns. And because it's a pretty low-risk experiment, it's no big deal if Panera decides later that it doesn't want to make these items anymore., Panera is getting the word out through its customer loyalty program and through social media sites like Facebook and Twitter. It's not uncommon for restaurants launching secret menus to use word of mouth in this way., But that doesn't always cut it. I found that out when I went through two different McDonald's drive-throughs recently looking for a Monster Mac that's a Big Mac with eight patties and left empty-handed., Oh, well. I'm probably better off without it anyway.
A Boston Globe newpaper sits inside a vendor box in 2009., A Boston Globe newpaper sits inside a vendor box in 2009., The New York Times Co. will continue shedding assets, this time announcing it is looking to sell The Boston Globe., The New York Times reports the company said it was looking to sell off the Globe and other New England properties to focus energy and resources on its flagship newspaper., The Boston Globe reports the Times bought the paper in 1993 for $1.1 billion, a record in the newspaper business., The Globe adds:, The Times Co. last tried to sell the Globe in 2009, after first threatening to shut the newspaper down because it was losing money. After receiving wage cuts and other cost-saving concessions from Globe employees, the Times Co. decided not to sell at that time, because it had received bids lower than it had hoped from two different business groups., Since then, the Times Co. has sold a number of its other properties. The Globe and its online businesses BostonGlobe.com and Boston.com turned an operating profit in 2012, according to people involved in the company's results.
Dell's founder and another tech company have announced plans to take the computer giant private. While companies can benefit from withdrawing from the stock market, there are potential pitfalls as well., It's been a busy month for corporate America., American Airlines and U.S. Airways announced plans to merge, Comcast bought the rest of NBCUniversal, Warren Buffett and Brazilian firm 3G are taking Heinz private. And Michael Dell, the founder of the computer company that bears his name, led a group that wants to buy the company back from investors for more than $24 billion., But why would a company want to leave Wall Street and go back to being privately held?, &ldquo; The people who initiated the process to take the business private can have their offer topped. They can lose control of the process., - Kevin Callaghan, managing director, Berkshire Partners, For Dell, the computer industry has changed dramatically. Consumers now want to buy sleek tablets and use cloud computing. Dell needs to change its business, but when you're a company traded on Wall Street, change can be hard., You have shareholders who sometimes have short-term interests, says Steven Davidoff, a law professor at Ohio State University. They're not looking to hold their shares for years. They often sell on fear., Going private can remove that pressure from shareholders who want results now., Michael Dell suggested as much in a statement earlier this month, saying the deal will help his company continue the execution of our long-term strategy and focus on delivering best-in-class solutions to our customers as a private enterprise., Making Radical Changes In Private, Kevin Callaghan, managing director at Berkshire Partners, a private equity firm in Boston, has helped a handful of companies go private over the years. When a company needs to make radical change, he says, achieving it can be easier out of the public eye., [It] might mean that they forgo some sales for a few quarters or a couple of years, Callaghan says. It might mean they have to exit businesses they're in., But it's not just struggling companies that opt to leave Wall Street, he says. For some, it just doesn't make sense to be publicly traded. It's a lot of work to comply with rules and requirements. If a business is not growing much, the markets might not give it much attention. Or its management might think it's worth more than investors give it credit for., At that point, a company might come to a private equity guy like Callaghan and say, Hey, I'm thinking of going private., Not that it happens often, Callaghan says. It's a decision that companies take very, very seriously and very, very rarely, I would say., And there are risks. For founders and management trying to buy back the company, there's the danger of other bidders' counteroffers, for instance., The people who initiated the process to take the business private can have their offer topped, Callaghan says. They can lose control of the process., There are other potential pitfalls, too. Jeffrey Pfeffer, a professor of organizational behavior at Stanford Business School, says management and founders sometimes overestimate their ability to turn things around., A lot of this is associated with hubris or pride, Pfeffer says. You think you know better. You think you're smarter than the world., Shifts To Private Ownership Ticking Back Up, But wise or not, expect more companies to follow Dell and Heinz down the path of private ownership. Before the Great Recession, about a quarter of deals were so-called leveraged buyouts that took companies private. In recent years, that number has been about 10 percent, but things are starting to pick back up., Stefan Selig, executive vice chairman at Bank of America Merrill Lynch, has been involved in most of the high-profile deals lately. February, he says, has been the biggest month in a long time., The start of this year has seen a 144 percent increase in the number of U.S. mergers and acquisitions versus the same period last year, according to analytics firm Dealogic., Selig says the combination of plentiful capital, low interest rates and pent-up demand is fueling all these deals., But favorable conditions aside, investors still have to like the terms. Some think Dell is worth more than the offer on the table. Likewise, some wonder why Heinz didn't look for other suitors before agreeing to the Warren Buffett-3G deal. To get off Wall Street, you still need Wall Street's approval.
A mailman for the U.S. Postal Service delivers mail on November 15, 2012 in Miami, Florida., A mailman for the U.S. Postal Service delivers mail on November 15, 2012 in Miami, Florida., The U.S. Postal Service is getting creative in its search for new revenue after last year's $15.9 billion budget shortfall. The agency says it will debut a new clothing and accessories line called Rain Heat &amp; Snow, inspired by its unofficial motto: Neither snow nor rain nor heat nor gloom of night stay these couriers from the swift completion of their appointed rounds., The line will not feature the navy blue shorts, safari hats and other uniform staples of your mail carrier. Sportswear and outerwear under the Rain Heat &amp; Snow label will have electronic wiring and capabilities that will allow people to plug in iPods and hear music while they're walking, jogging, said agency spokesman Roy Betts., The licensing agreement with Cleveland-based Wahconah Group comes on the heels of an announcement that the Postal Service will soon stop Saturday mail delivery, a move that's estimated to save $2 billion a year., This isn't the agency's first foray into retail. According to the Washington Post, the Postal Service introduced a limited retail line in the 1980s that included items such as T-shirts, mugs and neckties, all sold exclusively in post offices., It was discontinued., Expect this new line of clothing to debut in premiere department stores in 2014. Nordstrom is one store we're looking at, said Betts., We wondered: Will mail carriers be modeling the new line as they drop off our packages?, We just have to wait and see, Betts said.
Movie trailers can drive people to the theaters or keep them away altogether., Before the award presenters open the envelopes on Oscar Sunday, before the actors and producers take a single step on the red carpet, and even before the films hit theaters, the trailers for these films grace the big screen., These previews have the power to send audiences flocking to theaters or keep them away altogether., You really want to get butts in the seats and you want to highlight the best parts of that movie, says Stephen Garrett, the founder of the trailer production company Jump Cut Creative., He tells NPR's Neal Conan that there's a fine balance between enticing the audience to theaters and spoiling the plot twists., That's one thing that always makes me cringe, when I'm in a movie theater and I overhear people after the trailer saying, 'We'll, I won't see that movie because it's given everything away,' he says., He points to Silver Linings Playbook as an example of a Best Picture nominee with a trailer that walks that line really well., It's hitting story beats, one after the next, he says. And it kind of gives you a very clear overview of what this movie is like and what to expect when you go see the movie., He says this trailer also makes it clear that this movie isn't a traditional romantic comedy. The trailer includes the scene where a teenager knocks on the door and asks if he can do an interview for a school project on mental illness., And then the door is slammed, and then the music kicks in, Garrett says. That's what you would call a nice little punctuation for the trailer. You start with this kind of cold open, and then you go into the body of the trailer, which is, this is a movie about mental illness but it's going to make you laugh., Garrett's production company specializes in trailers for foreign, independent and documentary films. He has received 11 awards at the Golden Trailer Awards, an annual show that recognizes excellence in motion picture marketing., He says generally, different strategies are employed for different genres of film. For a historical drama like Lincoln, the trailer has to draw viewers who may already be somewhat familiar with the plot., This is a man who's larger than life. So the treatment is very reverential, he explains. They're already prompting you with the suggestion, 'This is an important movie. You need to go see this.' , The most intriguing aspect of the trailer for Garrett is the fact that the voice of Daniel Day-Lewis as Abraham Lincoln isn't heard until after the one-minute mark. He thinks that was done intentionally., You hear this thin, reedy voice, he says. If that was the first voice you'd heard or the first one you've seen if you watched the trailer, you might have giggled a little bit., Garrett says the editors likely asked this question: How do we introduce him without scaring everybody away, or making them laugh or making them think this is a comedy instead of a historical drama?, Garrett says there's a lot of pressure on the editors putting these packages together. There's so much money involved with some of the larger, big studio films, that I think there is an anxiety about people not quite knowing what to expect.
The deal has been talked about for days. Now it's official:, OfficeMax Incorporated and Office Depot, Inc. today announced the signing of a definitive merger agreement, reads a statement posted online by Office Depot., It goes on to say that the combined company would have had revenue of about $18 billion last year. It's hoped that the merger will give the new entity significantly improved financial strength and flexibility, with the ability to deliver long-term operating performance and improvements through its increased scale and significant synergy opportunities., The Wall Street Journal says it's Office Depot that is effectively buying OfficeMax in an all-stock deal that values the rival office-supplies retailer at roughly $1.19 billion. ... Office Depot said it will issue 2.69 new shares valuing OfficeMax at $13.50 a share based on Tuesday's close for each OfficeMax share outstanding., Reuters notes that Staples has 39.9 percent of the U.S. office supply market, Office Depot 19.2 percent and OfficeMax holds 15.7 percent, according to Euromonitor International. It adds that Office supply retailers, often seen as a barometer of economic health, have suffered as demand for their products fell after the recent U.S. recession. They also face strong competition from Amazon.com Inc and Wal-Mart Stores Inc in selling everything from pens and notebooks to furniture to government, businesses and individuals., It's expected that some of the chains' stores will be closed since they do compete in some markets. What the company will be called after the deal is completed, most likely by the end of this year, isn't known., There was a bit of a hitch in today's announcement. As The Associated Press writes, there was some confusion about the deal Wednesday morning when Office Depot reported terms of the deal in a release on its Web site early Wednesday and then removed it, before restoring it after the market opened.
Going up: A construction worker at a housing development in San Mateo, Calif., in June 2012., Going up: A construction worker at a housing development in San Mateo, Calif., in June 2012., Work was begun on 0.8 percent more single-family homes in January than had been started the month before, the Census Bureau and Department of Housing and Urban Development say., And the number of single-family starts was up 20 percent from January 2012., A 26.1 percent drop in starts, from December to January, on construction of apartment buildings and other multi-family homes dampened the news somewhat., But looking ahead, there was a 1.9 percent increase in January from December in the number of permits issued for construction of single-family homes. The number of such permits was up 29.2 percent from January 2012., The increase in permits, says Reuters, reinforces expectations that the housing market will support economic growth this year., Also this morning, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that wholesale prices rose 0.2 percent in January from February.
Part-time librarian Janet Sims-Wood, 67, helps student Andre Williams navigate the online catalogue at the Accokeek Library at Prince George's Community College in Largo, Md., Part-time librarian Janet Sims-Wood, 67, helps student Andre Williams navigate the online catalogue at the Accokeek Library at Prince George's Community College in Largo, Md., Increasingly, people are continuing to work past 65. Almost a third of Americans between the ages of 65 and 70 are working, and among those older than 75, about 7 percent are still on the job. In Working Late, a series for Morning Edition, NPR profiles older adults who are still in the workforce., Janet Sims-Wood is a 67-year-old librarian living near Washington, D.C., who, like millions of other seniors, has had to stay in the workforce past retirement age to make ends meet. Some haven't saved enough, or their jobs didn't pay enough for them to save for retirement. The recession also took a toll: Retirement savings lost $2.8 trillion., The recession put a dent in Sims-Wood's savings, and she expects she'll have to stay in the workforce forever., The recession put a dent in Sims-Wood's savings, and she expects she'll have to stay in the workforce forever., About $100,000 of that came from Sims-Wood's savings, which is the reason she says she expects to stay in the workforce forever., Sims-Wood works part time in the library at Prince George's Community College in Maryland. When she began her career, working in a library was all about books. But here the rows of shiny computers seem to outnumber the stacks of dusty hardcovers. Sims-Wood is getting with the program., Sometimes the students know more than me, and they'll show me some stuff themselves. It's fun. I love learning new things, she says., Sims-Wood has devoted her working life to learning and to students. She was the assistant chief librarian at Howard University in Washington, D.C., working in its center for African-American history. She was encouraged there to do her own independent research. And that became her passion., My area was African-American women's history mainly. I just got a chance to do a lot of things most of it on their dime, she says., Sims-Wood's devotion to African-American history is one of the reasons she retired from Howard at 60. She wanted more time to conduct oral histories, to write and to speak. She also needed to help her siblings care for their mother, who lived in North Carolina. Then the recession hit. In addition to taking that $100,000 hit to her savings, her house lost value., Sims-Wood goes over computer data with librarian Maria Bonet. Though Sims-Wood is on the job at a time when she thought she would be retired, she stays positive. I have faith that things will work out. I don't care how bad they are. It's going to work out, she says., Sims-Wood goes over computer data with librarian Maria Bonet. Though Sims-Wood is on the job at a time when she thought she would be retired, she stays positive. I have faith that things will work out. I don't care how bad they are. It's going to work out, she says., It's underwater at this point. I owe more than what it's worth, she says. This year I think I will at least start talking to a Realtor and see what we can do [so] that I can eventually get rid of it., But selling at a loss won't provide the money for a down payment on a home in a retirement community as she'd hoped. Still, if you ask Sims-Wood about her financial troubles or about the death of her husband many years ago or her battle with breast cancer, she'll acknowledge that it's been hard sometimes but within a few seconds, she's smiling again., I'm also known as the 'faith lady.' I have faith that things will work out. I don't care how bad they are. It's going to work out, she says. You just keep moving. You do not stop, because you can get depressed and go home and sit down, and the next thing you know you're gone. Stay positive. We have to stay positive., When it comes to postponing retirement, Sims-Wood says she is more disappointed than miserable., I still enjoy being around people. People tell me I'm a people person, which I am, she says. I wish I could do the oral history full time, but this gives me the funds to do it from time to time., 'Have A Plan', Her optimism and perseverance seem to be part of her DNA. Her older sister, Mary Young, is also still working, at 79., I'm an educational psychologist and I'm employed by the Division of Corrections with their special education department. I work with 14- to 21-year-old inmates, male and female, Young says., The Sims sisters grew up in a tiny segregated town in North Carolina. They both have Ph.D.s. Sims-Wood gives her older sister a lot of credit for pushing her to get an education., When we were growing up in the '60s, a lot of the kids were not going to college, says Sims-Wood. But her sister told their parents that they had to send Sims-Wood to college., She was the one who made sure that I got into college, Sims-Wood says., Young married out of high school and raised two sons, so her education came in fits and starts over the years. She was Sims-Wood's inspiration., We were in college at the same time, says Sims-Wood. She was doing better than I was in college with a family and working. She's very smart., I was very motivated to improve my life, Young says., And through their work, the sisters say they want to help the next generation., One of the things we have to understand is that we're not always going to be in whatever position we are. You have to have a plan for whoever's coming after you, Sims-Wood says. It helps you to really not focus on yourself, because there's still a lot to do. When I leave here it's going to still be a lot to do.
Reports indicate that gas pump prices are at their highest level on record for this period of the year, but consumers might see a break in the near future if all goes well., Reports indicate that gas pump prices are at their highest level on record for this period of the year, but consumers might see a break in the near future if all goes well., If you've been behind the wheel recently, you already know gasoline prices are up., The national average price for regular gas rose to nearly $3.75 a gallon Tuesday, according to AAA's Daily Fuel Gauge Report., Retail prices have gone up for each of the last 33 or so days dating back to about Jan. 17, says Denton Cinquegrana, executive editor at the Oil Price Information Service., He estimates prices will rise a bit more in coming weeks, but he doesn't expect them to go above $4 a gallon like they did in the summer of 2008., Cinquegrana says prices rise near the end of winter every year. As refineries switch to summer blends to reduce smog, they shut down units and work on maintenance. Traders worry there won't be enough supply, so they start bidding up prices., Cinquegrana says this time around it's happening a few weeks earlier than typical. One reason is refiners are catching up on maintenance and repair work they weren't able to do late last year because of Superstorm Sandy., At an Exxon station just outside Philadelphia, regular gas is selling for nearly $3.78 per gallon., I've been looking around for the past four stations, and this was the cheapest one, Billy Boylan says while filling up his white sedan., A few pumps over, Nicole Cornwell fondly remembers when the price was $1.50 a gallon. Actually, winter of 2003 was the last time gas hovered around that cost, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration., Cornwell says she drives a lot for her work she cleans houses and offices. I got a new car and I got some good gas mileage, so that at least helps, she says., Since prices are going up earlier this year, they may come back down sooner, too., Gas prices are probably going to be higher at Easter than they are at Memorial Day and Fourth of July, Cinquegrana says. He cautions that could change if there are unexpected refinery shutdowns or more political problems in the Middle East's oil-producing countries., The Energy Information Administration projects lower gas prices in the near future, primarily because world oil prices are expected to decline. Crude oil accounts for about two-thirds of the cost of a gallon of gas., Overall this year, the EIA believes regular gas will average $3.55 per gallon across the country and $3.39 in 2014.
A federal judge in New Orleans has approved a $1 billion civil settlement over its role in the Gulf of Mexico oil spill where 11 men died in April of 2010, the AP reports., As we reported back in January, federal authorities blamed Transocean for acting negligently when the rig's crew proceeded with maneuvers to the deep-sea well in the face of clear danger signals that oil and natural gas were flowing., In total, Transocean has agreed to pay $1.4 billion in criminal and civil penalties., When the EPA announced the settlement, it said the $400 million in criminal penalties for criminal conduct was the second-largest criminal Clean Water Act fines and penalties in U.S. History., The AP adds:, U.S. District Judge Carl Barbier said in his ruling Tuesday that he found no just reason for delay in approving the civil settlement., Last week, a different judge approved Transocean's criminal settlement with the federal government. The company pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor charge and will pay an additional $400 million in criminal penalties.
In the past decade, a few big beer companies went on a buying spree, spending some $195 billion to buy up brewers around the world, according to Bloomberg., Beer drinkers can be excused for not noticing. Unlike, say, airlines, which fold their acquisitions into one big, global brand, big beer companies tend to keep the brands they buy in the market., As a result, the two biggest beer companies on the planet Anheuser-Busch InBev and SABMiller now own more than 200 brands based in 42 countries (including 18 in the U.S. alone). We've put together this handy guide so you can know whose beer you're really drinking., Source: Planet Money Reporting, Credit: Caitlin Kenney and Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, The story of Anheuser-Busch InBev's rise to global dominance is all about consolidation. Inbev was born out of a merger of Belgian brewer, Interbrew, and Latin American brewer, Companhia de Bebidas das Amricas aka AmBev, in 2004. That same year, Anheuser-Busch grew by acquiring one of China's biggest brewers, Harbin. The company we know today came about when InBev bought the American/Chinese powerhouse, Anheuser-Busch, for $52 billion dollars in 2008., SAB Miller, the number two global brewer, got its name in 2002 after South African Breweries bought Miller. Just a couple years later, the firm grew by buying up the second largest brewer in South America, Bavaria. Two years later, they launched a joint venture in the U.S. with MolsonCoors* to create MillerCoors. In 2011, they bought Australia's biggest brewer, Foster's, and took a big stake in Russia's second biggest brewer, Efes., These days, the beer market is increasingly about the world outside the United States. The fastest growing beer market in the world right now is China, and several South American markets are growing rapidly as well. That's why brewing giants like ABI are trying to snap up brewing operations all over the globe. Just last April, ABI paid $1.2 billion for a big stake in Cerveceria Nacional Dominicana, the Dominancan Republic national brewer, which brews Presidente beer., That's why Anheuser-Busch InBev (ABI), the world's largest brewer, wants to buy the world's seventh largest brewer, the Mexican brewer, Grupo Modelo., The buyout offer would give ABI control of 46 percent of the U.S. beer market (it has 39 percent of the U.S. beer market and Grupo Modelo has 7 percent). That alarmed the Department of Justice's antitrust division so much they sued to stop the merger., But ABI really wants to make this deal happen. The company even agreed to sell off the right to sell Corona in the U.S. The move is an attempt to appease U.S. regulators, but it hints at something larger ABI's interest in the market outside the U.S., The AB InBev and Grupo Modelo transaction has always been about Mexico and making Corona more global in all markets other than the U.S., the company said in a recent press release., *Clarification: The MillerCoors joint venture applies to the U.S. MolsonCoors still has sole ownership of Blue Moon and Coors Light outside the U.S.*
Reader's Digest's parent company has filed for bankruptcy protection., Reader's Digest's parent company has filed for bankruptcy protection., Reader's Digest, the venerable magazine that has battled declining readership, may be in trouble: Its parent company has filed for bankruptcy protection for the second time in less than four years., RDA Holding Co. said Sunday that it plans to emerge from Chapter 11 in less than six months, adding that the restructuring will allow its debt to be cut by about 80 percent, to $100 million in that time. The magazine will continue to be published during the period., The company said a group of secured noteholders were giving the company $45 million to support its operations during the process as part of a $105 million loan to pay off its existing bank debt., I think it probably is the end for Reader's Digest, David Sumner, a professor of journalism at Ball State University, tells our Newscast unit. It's facing problems from two or three different levels from declining readership, advertising, more so than the vast majority of American magazines., The average reader of the magazine, Sumner says, is in her 50s, and her household income is between $50,000 and $60,000., It has one of the least attractive audiences for advertisers, he says., The company has taken several steps amid declining revenue. Here's more from The Associated Press:, As revenue declines, Reader's Digest has been selling off some of its assets. Its food website Allrecipes.com went for $175 million last year, and it sold its Every Day with Rachael Ray cooking magazine in late 2011. Meredith Corp., publisher of the Better Homes and Gardens magazine, bought both., Reader's Digest paid circulation fell 0.6 percent to 5.5 million at the end of last year, according to the Alliance for Audited Media. That was about where it stood after cutting its guaranteed circulation in 2009. But in 1995, Reader's Digest had circulation of more than 15 million., The company last filed Chapter 11 protection in 2009, and emerged from bankruptcy in early 2010., Reader's Digest is still one of the world's most widely read magazines.
Todd Macy, a banker from Marin County, Calif., was the victim of identity theft. Nearly a year after filing his return, he's still waiting for his federal tax refund., If you usually wait until April to file your taxes, you might want to hurry up before identity thieves beat you to it. Using stolen names and Social Security numbers, these criminals file fake tax returns with false wage and withholding information. This generates big and fraudulent refunds, before the real taxpayer gets around to filing., The Internal Revenue Service says it's busy working to combat what prosecutors call a fraud epidemic., Source: Internal Revenue Service, Most taxpayers don't have any idea something is wrong until they hit the send button on their taxes and get an error message., I was told somebody had already filed a return using my name and my Social Security number, says Todd Macy, a banker from Marin County, Calif. It happened to him last year., I was shocked, and I felt like I was a victim, Macy says., A few hundred miles south in Bakersfield, a teacher wondered what happened to her refund., I just figured something was wrong with their system, says Joyce Hood., Someone had filed a return in her husband's name, using his Social Security number. The identity thief likely falsified earnings and made off with thousands of dollars from the Treasury., The problem has been growing fast., Our cases have increased by about 650 percent since 2008, says Nina Olson, the National Taxpayer Advocate, kind of the internal watchdog at the IRS. People go to her when they have a problem with their returns., The IRS itself says the number of cases has doubled each year in recent years. And a lot of the fraud is coming out of South Florida., It catches on like fire. It spreads like a virus. Friends tell their friends, says Wifredo Ferrer, U.S. attorney for the Southern District of Florida., He calls this crime an epidemic. Fraudsters come from all walks of life: hospital workers, former Marines, white collar professionals and former gang members who have switched from street violence to tax fraud., I'm seeing from a lot of the local police departments in South Florida that the violence in their communities is being substituted for stolen identity tax refund fraud, he says., The victims are as diverse as the perpetrators: rich, poor, young, old, alive and dead., Ferrer says a Social Security number attached to a name now sells on the street for as much as $1,000. Scammers think they can get far more than that from a fraudulent refund., For the victims, it means aggravation and long waits for a refund that's rightfully theirs., Joyce Hood, the teacher in Bakersfield, says she spent hours at the IRS office. Officials told her it could take up to a year to get her refund., And I just looked at them, and I said, I can't, I really need this money. I have a daughter starting college, says Hood., As she waited, she paid part of her daughter's tuition with a credit card, racking up interest charges until the refund finally came last fall., The IRS says it has stopped 5 million attempts to get fraudulent refunds, saving taxpayers $20 billion. And it says it's using more aggressive screening technology to try to weed out scammers., We've at least doubled the number of filters that we have. The filters work very well, says Steve Miller, the IRS acting commissioner. He declined to elaborate for security reasons., The IRS also says it took action last month against nearly 400 people suspected of refund tax fraud. Miller says the agency is working on its online security, and better ways to identify the real filer., I think we'll get there, he says., But critics say the IRS could do more. Last year, a Treasury official estimated refund fraud could cost the government $21 billion over the next five years., The IRS also has some work to do to get its computer systems talking to each other. Banker Todd Macy says someone used his Social Security number in February 2012, but when he filed an extension in April, there was no warning. It wasn't until October that he discovered the fraud. Now, he's still waiting for his refund., And I probably won't see that refund for, I'm told, at least six months or a year, Macy says., He's not alone. Even some IRS workers have been victims of refund fraud.
A Union Pacific freight train passes over a grade crossing in Elmhurst, Ill., A Union Pacific freight train passes over a grade crossing in Elmhurst, Ill., From the steam engine to visions of a national high-speed rail system, railroads have made their mark on American culture., In his first term, President Obama promised to create a national system of high-speed rail, though he was scarcely the first politician to have done so. The January 2010 stimulus bill allocated $8 billion for high-speed rail projects, but Congress rejected federal funding for it., In his State of the Union address on Tuesday, the president reiterated the goal of having passenger rail rise again., But these new projects could conflict with the freight systems that go largely undetected for many Americans., As it stands now, Amtrak pays private companies in the center of the country to run its low-speed passenger trains on freight-rail tracks. But high-speed trains would need their own tracks, depriving the freight-rail system of some of that revenue., How to build a high-speed system without hurting the freight industry is a problem that has not yet been solved, says professor Christopher Barkan, director of the RailTEC center at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign., The freight railroad network is a great asset to our economy and environment, he says, and we need to be careful that expansion of passenger service does not harm the viability of that efficient freight-rail transit system we've developed., Mark Sprague's Illinois farm covers about 3,000 acres near the Mississippi River. He grows mainly corn, soybeans and a bit of winter wheat, and he relies heavily on freight rail to get it around., For the past several years, I'd say close to 70 percent of my corn has actually left this area by rail, he says., Cheap rail is hugely important to Sprague's harvest., You can move a ton of freight about 125 miles with a gallon of diesel fuel [by truck]. But by rail, it's more like 500 miles you can move a ton of freight with a gallon of diesel fuel, he says., &ldquo; We have the world's best freight-rail system, but no one sees that. And when they do see it, they're waiting for a mile-long train to go by so they can get to their child's soccer game., - Edward Hamberger, Association of American Railroads, From Sprague's farm in Hull, his corn travels 130 miles by rail to the city of Decatur, in central Illinois. He says he feels like he's in a good spot: Freight rail carriers compete for his business, which helps keep it affordable., There's good competition between the rail lines. There's several major carriers, and here in the Midwest we're served by all of them essentially, he says., Edward Hamberger is the president and CEO of the Association of American Railroads, a freight-rail industry group., We have 140,000 miles of track, an interconnected network that binds this country together, he says., Hamberger says Sprague is just one of millions of customers served by American freight rail., Not everyone knows that the freight-rail system in America is privately owned. This year alone America's private freight companies will spend $24.5 billion that's 40 cents of every revenue dollar back into the infrastructure in terms of new locomotives, railroad ties, miles of track, signal systems, rail cars, he says., Hamberger says freight rail is a geographic necessity in America., In the U.S., with 3,000 miles from coast to coast, we better have a pretty effective, efficient and cost-effective way of moving that freight just to get to ports so we can compete in world markets, he says., Even though freight trains are heavier and slower than trucks, they're more fuel-efficient, and therefore more cost-effective. Plus, many American highways and bridges need infrastructure repair., But most Americans don't see trains every day, like they do trucks. So Hamberger says their idea of the railroad is kind of out of date., Everybody says, 'My grandfather worked on the railroad,' and everybody says, 'My goodness, why don't we have a railroad system like Japan has?' We have the world's best freight-rail system, but no one sees that, he says. And when they do see it, they're waiting for a mile-long train to go by so they can get to their child's soccer game., Hamberger says that image could be a problem as America begins to build high-speed passenger rail systems. The issue, he says, is that high-speed passenger trains could actually threaten the health of freight rail if not carefully coordinated., In addition, political opponents of the president's vision say America is just too spread out, too large and diffusely populated for high-speed economics to work., The population densities in countries where it has worked are different than in the U.S., says RailTEC's Barkan. Well, that's definitely true out in the West, where you have vast swathes of land with very little population., It's a different story in large metropolitan centers in the Midwest, though, Barkan says., If you actually look at the demographics and the distribution of the people and geography, it's not that dissimilar from, say, France, he says, which is another country that has a very successful high-speed passenger rail system and continues to expand their system.
People around the world want the same thing from their doctors. First, do no harm. Second, take a look at this weird bump and tell me if I should get worried., The job is basically the same in many countries around the world. But the pay is wildly different. The median salary for U.S. doctors is about $250,000 a year. In Western Europe, it's less than half that. In developing countries, the salaries are even lower., Through insurance and out of our own pockets, we pay for doctors' services, just like we pay for all other kinds of goods and services.And yet, with lots of other things we buy, we often turn to imports to save money., We should think of doctors the same way we think of shirts, says the economist Dean Baker. If we can get doctors at a lower cost from elsewhere in the world then we could save enormous amounts of money., The big difference, of course, is that a bad t-shirt won't kill you., So, in the name of protecting patients, we put a lot of barriers up to make it harder for foreign doctors to work in the U.S. Even for fully qualified doctors practicing in countries very similar to ours, it can take years of extra training to get licensed to practice in the U.S., Many U.S. states recognize Canadian medical schools, and have tried to streamline the process for Canadian doctors to work here. But it can be complicated. Every state has its own bureaucracy and license application and requirements., A Canadian critical care doctor I talked to moved with his wife to California, where he planned to practice. After nine months of paperwork and bureaucracy, he gave up and went back to Canada., For doctors from other parts of the world, the process is guaranteed to take even longer. Foreign-trained doctors even those with advanced skills, who have been practicing medicine for years are required to repeat years of the basic residency training that doctors go through right after medical school., The process may be seen as perhaps cumbersome to practicing physicians, says Dr, Humayan Chaudhry, President of the Federation of State Medical Boards. But... the goal at the end of the day is to protect the public., Chaudhry says there simply isn't a way to evaluate the quality of medical training in every country around the world. And clearly, he says, it doesn't deter doctors from coming. Chaudhry says that 22 percent of all the licensed doctors in the United States went to medical school outside the country., But, Dean Baker argues, there should be even more foreign-trained doctors than there already are. A lot of poor and rural areas in the U.S. don't have enough doctors. And foreign-trained physicians are much more likely to specialize in primary care and go to work in such places., Baker says that rather than have professionals spend years redoing their training, the U.S. should try to make the process more simple and transparent. He says we should tell young, aspiring doctors:, Here's what you have to do. Here are the courses you have to take. Here's is the test you have to pass. If you pass those tests you get to come to the United States and be a doctor just like anyone who was trained in the United States., And the benefit, he argues, isn't just for foreign doctors, or rural areas where they might work. More doctors means more competition. That means lower health-care prices., As they say about t-shirts: if you can make sure the quality is the same, why pay more?
Coast Guard patrols near the cruise ship Carnival Triumph in the Gulf of Mexico on Monday. The Carnival Triumph lost propulsion power after an engine room fire a day earlier., Coast Guard patrols near the cruise ship Carnival Triumph in the Gulf of Mexico on Monday. The Carnival Triumph lost propulsion power after an engine room fire a day earlier., It's been a rough voyage for the cruise-line industry in the past few years., The engine room fire, power outage and ensuing problems aboard the stricken Carnival Triumph in recent days are far from the first recent major problem aboard a cruise ship. In 2010, for example, a similar fire, with a similar outcome, occurred aboard the Carnival Splendor. A year ago, there was the Costa Concordia disaster. And just this week, a lifeboat accident aboard a Thomson Cruises ship killed five crew members and caused the company to cancel the cruise and fly the passengers back home., Ross Klein, a professor at Memorial University of Newfoundland who tracks cruise-line mishaps on his website CruiseJunkie.com, makes a direct connection between the growth of the cruise industry and the spate of problems. I think we are seeing more incidents because there are more ships, he says., Maximum Capacity, Ships run by the Carnival Corp. have had a number of the problems in recent years, a fact that Mike Driscoll, editor at Cruise Week, notes is likely due to the company's near oligopoly in the industry besides flagship brand Carnival, it also owns Costa Cruises, Princess Cruises, Holland America, Cunard and P&O;, among others., But Driscoll says another issue could be the sheer size of the vessels. They've become much bigger since the first of the floating playground style luxury ships made their appearance circa 1970., I think there is a general feeling that these ships have reached about the maximum size, he says., Take the 1971-built Pacific Princess, made famous on television as the Love Boat. It was just over 500 feet long and 20,000 gross tons. Compare that with the 1,187-foot, 225,000-ton Allure of the Seas, launched three years ago by Royal Caribbean International., Allure of the Seas and [sister ship] Oasis of the Seas, I think that's about the biggest you're going to get, Driscoll says. I think that safety is an issue. There are so many passengers on these floating cities. What happens when things go wrong?, Sizing Up Safety, Jay Herring, a former senior officer at Carnival and author of the book The Truth about Cruise Ships, told NPR's Greg Allen that with more than 3,000 passengers many of them children and elderly unless the ship is sinking, evacuating them over open water is just not possible., The cruise liner Costa Concordia ran aground off the island of Giglio, Italy, in January 2012., So imagine you have this little bitty boat, bobbing up and down, and you're trying to transfer passengers from a ship that's essentially stationary, walking across a gangway. It's just so dangerous, he says., In short, with bigger ships come bigger and more expensive potential safety headaches. Driscoll says the wreck of the Costa Concordia off Tuscany in January 2012 in which getting passengers off the ship was part of the problem was a key event that drove up the cost of protection and indemnity insurance, though the industry won't say by how much., Carnival CEO Gerry Cahill said this week that the company's priority was to ensure the safety of its guests. Bud Darr, vice president of technical and regulatory affairs at the Cruise Line Industry Association, says the industry has no bigger commitment than to safety., A Shift In The Wind?, Still, Driscoll is quick to note that the incident with the Carnival Triumph is likely to be just a blip on the radar for an industry that has seen phenomenal growth over the years., It always seems in the first week that people say, 'Oh my gosh,' but then they think, 'But this won't happen to me' and the normal patterns resume, he says., Carolyn Spencer-Brown, editor-in-chief of the website Cruise Critic, disagrees., Spencer-Brown, who spoke with NPR's Allen, says the site's forums have been getting a lot of traffic about the Triumph incident. People are saying, 'I just don't have confidence in Carnival anymore,' she says. It has nothing to do with reality, but it has a lot to do with perceptions., Former Carnival officer Walt Nadolny says one of the cruise line's problems this week has been the extensive media coverage, which he thinks at times has verged on hysteria., Everybody thinks they're going to die on the ship and I'm just shaking my head, he tells Allen., Agreed that they are in discomfort, [that] they don't have air conditioning. It's hot, he says, but it's made worse by the media then grabbing that bone and saying, 'Let's blow it out of proportion.'
Kansas Gov. Sam Brownback, shown delivering the State of the State address last month, is pushing to get rid of the state's income tax, which has some Republicans concerned., Kansas Gov. Sam Brownback, shown delivering the State of the State address last month, is pushing to get rid of the state's income tax, which has some Republicans concerned., Kansas Gov. Sam Brownback has put the state on what he calls a glide path to zero income tax. But that glide path is far from being clear or smooth., On the face of it, Brownback seems to enjoy a remarkably strong political position. He's a conservative Republican, flanked by GOP supermajorities in both legislative chambers. His allies helped purge moderate Republicans from the state Senate in last year's election., I think the road is open, Brownback says. I think we do provide an alternative model. I think we do provide a red-state model., In 2012, Kansas eliminated the state income tax for about 190,000 small businesses and cut the rate substantially for high-income individuals., We're going from the highest-tax state in the region, to the lowest-tax state in the region, Brownback says., &ldquo; I think the road is open. I think we do provide an alternative model. I think we do provide a red-state model., - Kansas Gov. Sam Brownback, Jonathan Williams, director of the Tax and Fiscal Policy Task Force for the American Legislative Exchange Council, says no other state has eliminated the income tax for small businesses. The group has ties to politically active corporations, like Wichita-based Koch Industries., Well, Gov. Brownback has made very bold moves towards making Kansas a more competitive place to do business and to create jobs, Williams says., And that move is causing a stir in Kansas City, along the state line that divides the community between Kansas and Missouri., Seizing A No-Tax Opportunity, Steve Browne is a partner at Meara Welch Browne, an accounting firm that's relocating to Kansas from Missouri., Well, we moved from just a mile or two miles on the east side of state line to literally ... a few hundred yards on the west side of state line now, he says., Browne says that none of the firm's employees needs to move. By trading one office building for another, though, and shredding most state taxes, the firm is boosting its income by more than 6 percent. It was a no-brainer for the business move., But the important calculation here is whether the firm's gain, and Missouri's loss, is actually a win for Kansas., 'It Hurts The People', That benefits no one in the end. And it hurts the people because the tax money is gone, says Republican state Rep. Barbara Bollier., Bollier lives in Mission Hills, Kan., just north of where the accounting business is moving. She's pro-business but can't swallow the size of last year's tax cuts, which will cost the state more than $850 million annually with the bulk of it going to higher-income earners., States With Zero Or Limited Income Taxes, Alaska, Florida, Nevada, New Hampshire: 5 percent of dividends and interest income only, South Dakota, Tennessee: 6 percent of dividends and interest income only, Texas, Washington, Wyoming, Source:Federation of Tax Administrators , The governor's been very clear it's an experiment, and it is, she says. We were the [only state] in the country that did this. So it's either a huge win or a horrible loss., Bollier points out that income tax produces more than a third of state revenues. She says several neighboring states are talking about cutting or eliminating the same taxes., She fears a race to the bottom, which could possibly limit new jobs and bring too little new money for Kansas to avoid painful consequences., I have a hard time looking at the schoolchildren in my neighborhood and saying, 'I'm going to do an experiment on you, and if we lose, your schools are going down the tubes,' Bollier says., Brownback promises that he's not going to let that happen, but there's a problem: lost revenue from the income tax cuts. So he's proposed something radical for a conservative Republican: a serious tax increase, one he hopes will be short term., An Arduous Process, The governor wants to extend a sales tax that's set to expire and end some tax deductions. When you add it all up, projected tax revenues actually go up by as much as $455 million., Democrats are calling it Robin Hood in reverse, stealing from the poor to give to the rich. And it's not going quite smoothly with Kansas Republicans like Rep. Scott Schwab., So you're asking me to raise taxes today for a tax cut in five years, Schwab says. People who campaigned in the summer promoted cutting taxes today, he adds., &ldquo; That benefits no one in the end. And it hurts the people because the tax money is gone., - Republican state Rep. Barbara Bollier, But tax cuts today on top of big ones from last year would likely crater the state budget, which would also be unpopular., It's messy. Brownback says the transition is the arduous part of the process., If you ask people, 'Do you want to do away with the state income tax?' a good portion would say yes, he says. OK, now how do you do that?, How indeed? It's a question vexing Kansas, as it struggles to develop a new red-state model.
The Crystal River Nuclear Plant has stood idle since workers cracked the reactor's containment building in 2009. The facility is now slated to close permanently., The Crystal River Nuclear Plant has stood idle since workers cracked the reactor's containment building in 2009. The facility is now slated to close permanently., The operator of Florida's Crystal River nuclear plant sent shockwaves through the state when it announced recently that it was shutting down the facility for good., When nuclear plants have closed elsewhere, locals have cheered. But in Citrus County, it's been more like a death in the family., At Fat Boy's Bar-B-Q restaurant in Crystal River, owner Bubba Keller says he's worried about what's going to happen to the community. I mean, things are already tough, Keller says. If this makes it worse, don't know if I can hang in there., Keller's restaurant has been serving beef, pork ribs and chicken here for more than 40 years. When the Crystal River plant was operating, Fat Boy's Bar-B-Q could depend on regular takeout orders from the several hundred people who worked there., But those days are gone. The plant shut down for maintenance in 2009 and last week, Duke Energy announced it would not reopen., An Economic Engine, Shut Down For Good, Citrus County is a largely rural area that's still struggling with the collapse of the housing market and the construction industry. Coming on top of that, Keller says, the plant's closure hurts., It's definitely going to trickle down. I mean, if it hurts the economy any more than it's already hurting, he says. Because our biggest problem is our sales are down, and that's primarily because our biggest clientele can't afford to go out and eat., For more than 40 years, the county's main economic engine was the nuclear plant. Outside the gates of the Crystal River facility, you can still see steam rising but that's from coal-fired power plants., Duke Energy, which owns the Crystal River plant, says it decided closing the facility was more cost effective than attempting to repair it., Duke Energy, which owns the Crystal River plant, says it decided closing the facility was more cost effective than attempting to repair it., The company that owned the nuclear plant, Progress Energy, messed up in a big way. In an effort to upgrade the plant's steam turbines, company employees cracked the reactor's containment building. When they tried to fix it, they cracked it again., Now, the plant's owners are saying they've decided to shut it down for good., We believe the decision to retire the nuclear plant is in the best interests of all of our customers, our investors, the state of Florida as a whole and our company, says Suzanne Grant, spokeswoman for Duke Energy, the company that took over Crystal River last year after merging with Progress Energy., In looking at the cost and risks associated with repairing the damaged plant, Duke decided shutting it down was the most cost-effective option. But that leaves officials in Citrus County with some tough decisions to make., A County's Tax Base Shrinks, In Crystal River last week, more than 100 officials and business leaders attended a Chamber of Commerce luncheon where county administrator Brad Thorpe laid out the grim details., We are in a crisis. You all know that, Thorpe told the group. And you realize that we will get through this., Even before it decided to close the nuclear plant, Duke Energy told Citrus County it believed it was paying too much in taxes. This year, the company paid just $19 million of a $35 million tax bill., It put us in a very difficult position, says Joe Meek, chairman of the Citrus County Commission. We're a community of 142,000 people. A business that pays 26 percent of our tax base will have a major impact when they don't pay that., Citrus County and Duke Energy are in court over the tax dispute. But with the nuclear plant's closure, Meek says it's likely that the energy company will be paying even less in taxes and that county residents will have to pay more., The bottom line: There will be a bigger burden on the taxpayers who are here, Meek says. Our community is primarily a retirement community. We pride ourselves with having a low cost of living. And so we're going to have to balance all those things, but we're going to do it., But the pain from Crystal River's closure will be felt far beyond Citrus County. Duke Energy serves more than 1.5 million customers in Florida. It's those customers, not the company or its stockholders, who now will pay the bill from Crystal River and it's a big one., I would imagine that the ratepayers will be out up to the tune of close to $4 billion as time goes on, says Mike Fasano, a state lawmaker who represents many of those ratepayers., That total includes the botched upgrade, the cost of buying replacement power, funds to decommission the facility and the bill for a new gas-fired plant., Fasano is working to repeal a Florida law that allows companies that build or expand nuclear plants to bill customers for all the costs, even if the plants never go online., It shouldn't be the ratepayers paying for something that many of them will never benefit from, Fasano says. It should be the stockholders., Although it's closing Crystal River, Duke Energy says it's still committed to nuclear energy. It has plans to build two new nuclear plants in Florida in the next decade.
A United Airlines aircraft passes by a Continental Airlines plane at Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport in 2006. Their merger, begun in 2010, has been difficult, analysts say., A United Airlines aircraft passes by a Continental Airlines plane at Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport in 2006. Their merger, begun in 2010, has been difficult, analysts say., The proposed marriage of American Airlines and US Airways announced Thursday is likely the last in a series of industry mega-mergers, but history suggests combining two big carriers isn't easy., The history of airline mergers in the U.S. is good, bad and ugly, says Henry Harteveldt, a travel industry analyst at the consulting firm Hudson Crossing. He and many others point to the 2008 union of Delta and Northwest as the best merger in recent memory., Delta and Northwest had already been cooperating on a number of different issues, Harteveldt says. They were members of the same airline alliance, they cooperated on certain international flying; they had a complementary route network; they had similar cultures; they had a similar approach to doing business., Dealing With Pilot Seniority, Delta hired a former head of Northwest to lead the combined airline. And Daniel Kasper, a consultant at Compass Lexecon, says Delta did something else that was very smart: Pilots from both airlines wanted a deal, and Delta told them it wouldn't happen unless they could agree in advance on how they would merge their seniority lists., For pilots, seniority is critical; it defines what airplanes they fly, what schedules they fly, and ultimately how much money they make, Kasper says., It also determines who loses their job, if the new airline downsizes., Integrating pilot seniority lists is one of the most difficult aspects of airline mergers. For example, roughly eight years have passed since US Airways merged with America West, and the airline is still operating with two separate sets of pilots who won't fly together., 'No Love Lost', Pilot integration has also been an issue in the United Airlines/Continental Airlines merger. And Kasper says other parts of the 2010 merger have been challenging, too., That was a really complex one to begin with, he says. You had two large, well-established airlines, and certainly there was no love lost between Continental and United to begin with., Their cultures were very different, as was the passenger experience., Analyst Harteveldt's assessment of that merger is harsh. He says Continental had been known for good customer service, but United's new leadership, which came primarily from Continental, squandered that goodwill., Harteveldt says the company didn't do a very good job melding the technology systems or the reservations process. Flight operations weren't smooth either. Last July, for example, fewer than 65 percent of United's flights were on time., It's very, very interesting to see what happens when you act with arrogance, Harteveldt says. When you don't pay attention to the details, when you take your business for granted, and unfortunately that's what happened with United., Still, experts believe that merger will ultimately be successful in financial terms. As for the marriage of American and US Airways, Standard and Poor's analyst Philip Baggaley says over the long run it too will likely work out financially. But he says, We don't see quite as much potential as we did with Delta/Northwest or United/Continental., Missing Pieces, Baggaley suggests that the route networks of American and US Airways don't complement each other as well as those in some of the other mergers and he suggests that internationally, there would still be missing pieces., Neither of them is strong in the Pacific; they don't have many of their own routes there, he says., And as Baggaley points out, international flights with full-fare business travelers are the most lucrative., He cites another potential problem. We think that a merger would raise labor costs possibly by a fair amount, Baggaley says., The pilots of American and US Airways are slated to get a pay raise as part of the deal. It was one of the carrots that US Airways offered to American's pilots to get their support for the merger., Labor costs are, of course, a huge factor in the airline industry, and they can make the difference between a carrier making money and not.
Makeshift tents are seen on the deck of the Carnival cruise ship Triumph, in a photo taken Sunday, the first day it spent without engine power. The image was provided by Kalin Hill of Houston., Makeshift tents are seen on the deck of the Carnival cruise ship Triumph, in a photo taken Sunday, the first day it spent without engine power. The image was provided by Kalin Hill of Houston., The Carnival cruise ship Triumph docked in Mobile, Ala., late Thursday night, as the job of towing the stricken 100,000-ton ship hundreds of miles across the Gulf of Mexico took longer than expected. The ship's 3,143 passengers had coped with sewage problems and a lack of ventilation since Sunday, when the Triumph was crippled by an engine room fire., Updated 2:15 a.m. ET Friday: All Passengers Disembarked, A spokesman for Carnival says all passengers have left the cruise ship that was stranded for days without power and running water., Update at 11:22 p.m. ET: First Passengers Disembark, The first passengers are now beginning to get off the disabled cruise ship. It will take hours for all them to disembark from the Triumph., Update at 10:44 p.m. ET: Carnival Chief Apologizes, In a news conference alongside the docking cruise ship, Carnival CEO Gerry Cahill apologized for the inconvenience to passengers aboard the Triumph., He said the company prides itself on providing a great vacation experience, but clearly we failed in this particular case., He said he would board the ship to apologize to the passengers on board., Update at 10:23 p.m. ET.: Ship Docking At Port, The Triumph is now docking at the port in Mobile, Ala., but passengers have to wait hours to disembark., Here's more from The Associated Press:, Spectators watch the Carnival cruise ship Triumph near Dauphin Island, Ala., Thursday, as the ship is towed to a terminal in Mobile. The Triumph is expected to arrive late Thursday night., Spectators watch the Carnival cruise ship Triumph near Dauphin Island, Ala., Thursday, as the ship is towed to a terminal in Mobile. The Triumph is expected to arrive late Thursday night., The Triumph was pulling into port at about 9:15 p.m. Central time Thursday after taking about six grueling hours to be towed from the mouth of Mobile Bay some 30 miles to the port., Anxious passengers are lining the decks waving, cheering loudly and whistling to those on shore., Update at 9:39 p.m. ET: Ship 5 Miles From Terminal, Carnival officials say the Triumph is 5 miles from the cruise terminal in Mobile, Ala. The ship is expected between 9:30 and 10:30 p.m. Central time., Terry Thornton, Carnival's senior vice president, said warm food, blankets and cellphone await the passengers., Update at 4:30 p.m. ET: Hours To Leave The Ship, Faced with possibly only one working elevator, it could take 4-5 hours for passengers to disembark, according to industry-watching site Cruise Ind. Carnival says that the Triumph will be the largest ship ever to dock at the Alabama Cruise Terminal in Mobile., Update at 4:20 p.m. ET: Arrival Pushed Back, Carnival has announced that the Triumph will arrive between 10 p.m. and midnight ET., Update at 3:35 p.m. ET: Triumph Being Towed Again, The Carnival cruise ship Triumph drifts in the Gulf of Mexico Monday, before the arrival of tugs that are now towing it to Mobile. The ship is expected to arrive Thursday night., Cruise Critic reports that the lead tugboat has been reattached and the Triumph is now headed to the port, citing Carnival., Update at 3:05 p.m. ET: Towline Snaps, The Triumph's speed, which had been reported at 5 mph by the Coast Guard, has slowed to a snail's pace after one of four tugs pulling the ship reported a broken towline. Petty Officer William Colclough says the ship will be 'dead in the water' as the tugboat with the broken line is replaced with a useable vessel, the AP reports., Update at 1:45 p.m. ET: Ship In Sight Of Land; A Passenger's Story, The first sightings of the Triumph from Alabama's coast were reported around 12:30 p.m. ET. But that doesn't mean the journey is near its end. Off-shore conditions are slowing the ship, and it may also need to be turned or spun around, so that its gangplanks are on the proper side to disembark at the terminal., They originally told us 4 p.m., but due to wind and weather conditions, we didn't make it as far yesterday as they would have hoped, says Ben Vogelzang, a passenger on the ship. He spoke with NPR's Newscast unit around lunchtime Thursday., Vogelzang says the Triumph's passengers are busy making travel arrangements to get them home after they finally arrive a process that's been made more difficult by a lack of enough power or cellphone access. And they're getting periodic updates the way they have all week: via loudspeaker announcements, and pieces of paper slipped under cabin doors., The Triumph's passengers have adapted to the lack of power and air conditioning that has left interior cabins dark, stuffy and hot, says Vogelzang, who's traveling with his girlfriend. Passengers are staying close to doors, he said, to catch any available breeze., Still, he says, I really don't have anything bad to say about the situation. It could be a lot worse., Here are more details about life aboard the ship from Vogelzang:, This has been pretty consistent throughout the time we've been on board is, we've had plenty of food, an amazing amount of food, he says, thanks to provision visits from other Carnival cruise ships., The conditions on board are pretty nice. I mean, we're still on a nice cruise ship. We have some power, some lights on board, especially in the common areas. They've been able to get some entertainment up for us, some musicians as well as comedians... It's been pretty pleasant, considering the situation. However, the real tough part is just having to be on the boat this whole time, and just keep waiting., The other hard part has been the toilet situation, which is probably the most uncomfortable. They've been able to get some toilets working, and some of them go out and then stop working. And different parts of the ship have been working at certain times. So, it's kind of difficult to find a working bathroom... that's kind of been the hardest situation on board., Pretty much everyone's sleeping in common areas. They've pulled their mattresses up from their rooms... like, where I'm sleeping, in the auditorium, in the theater. And other people are sleeping out on deck., It's been a trying time on the ship, but Vogelzang says he's not too upset with Carnival., I know they're trying their best to get it all squared away for everyone that needs to. You can tell you're trying their hardest. I think most people onboard understand that, he says. But I know there are a lot of people that are also very cranky about it, because they want to get home as soon as possible, and to have any more complication on top of this makes the situation even worse., After arriving in Mobile, Vogelzang says his group will board a bus tonight. He's a little less certain about his travel plans in the distant future., I will definitely think twice before going on another cruise, he says. I don't think it's fully made me never want to go on a cruise again, but I'd definitely have to think very hard about going on another cruise., Vogelzang was part of the group that included passenger Rachel Alderete, 54, who was evacuated from the ship earlier this week so that she could receive dialysis treatments. Alderete, who described her trip to The New York Times, flew back home Wednesday., It was scary, I tell you, Alderete tells The Times. It was horrible. I still have butterflies in my stomach., Our original post continues:, Pipes are busting, I know the sewer is backing up, and water is in the cabins, and it's just a nightmare, passenger Jamie Baker told NBC's TODAY show, in a phone interview from the ship., Mirroring other reports from the ship, Baker said that while food has been available, there have been long lines. She also reported that people have used trash cans as toilets., Like Katrina in the Dome, except it's afloat, Baker tells TODAY., The Carnival cruise line, which has previously stated it would refund nearly all expenses related to the cruise and give passengers a credit for a future voyage, has now said it will also pay each passenger $500. As of Wednesday afternoon, the Coast Guard reported the vessel was still 108 nautical miles south of Mobile., We know it has been a longer journey back than we anticipated at the beginning of the week under very challenging circumstances. We are very sorry for what our guests have had to endure, Carnival president Gerry Cahill said Wednesday. He added, I look forward to welcoming everyone to Mobile tomorrow and have mobilized our full resources to assist and support them as they travel home., This morning, the Triumph received 3,000 pounds of supplies from a Coast Guard MH-60 Jayhawk helicopter, a payload that included a generator and electrical cables. The ship has been operating under emergency generator power since Sunday's fire. It has also received food and other supplies from at least three other Carnival cruise ships., But those efforts could do little to improve the Triumph's problems which have included a shortage of working toilets and hot food, as well as stiflingly hot interior cabins that have forced many passengers to sleep on the open upper decks, relying on improvised tents., Passengers have been able to contact the mainland via texts and phone calls during resupply visits made by other ships. Tuesday, Cahill admitted that conditions on the Triumph are challenging, saying that his cruise line is doing its best to keep them comfortable., Carnival says it will have around 200 employees waiting to meet the Triumph and assist its passengers as they begin the journey home one week after they departed Galveston, Texas, on a four-day cruise. The cruise line is providing hotel rooms in New Orleans, and it has chartered flights out of Houston, Texas, to help passengers get back home., Both of those options would mean hours-long bus rides it's about two hours to New Orleans and seven to Houston. Passengers who drove will be taken back to Galveston., In Mobile, officials are upset that their town is being bypassed in favor of New Orleans. While Cahill said earlier this week that the cruise line had booked 1,500 rooms in Mobile and New Orleans, Carnival now says all rooms are in New Orleans., Those poor people haven't showered in five days, Maura Garino, vice president of the Holiday Inn Downtown, tells The Houston Chronicle. Who wants to get on a bus?, The next 14 voyages of the Triumph have been cancelled. After the ship arrives tonight, a team of Coast Guard and National Transportation Safety Board will begin an investigation into the fire and the ship's response to it.
A US Airways plane rests near two American Airlines jets at Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport last year. The combined carrier would be named American Airlines., A US Airways plane rests near two American Airlines jets at Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport last year. The combined carrier would be named American Airlines., American Airlines and US Airways on Thursday announced they plan to merge to create the country's largest airline, with a route network stretching from coast to coast, and covering large swaths of Latin America, Europe, Canada, the Caribbean and Africa., The merger would knit together American's parent company, Fort Worth, Texas-based AMR Corp., and Tempe, Ariz.-based US Airways Group Inc. to form a new company worth about $11 billion. The combined carrier with more than 6,700 daily flights to 336 destinations in 56 countries would leapfrog over its competitors in terms of passenger traffic, and would retain the name and logo of American., Here are answers to common questions about the merger:, Why are airlines always pushing for mergers?, Airlines have a very, very hard time making profits. US Airways endured a couple of round trips to bankruptcy court, and American is still trying to pull out of a bankruptcy filed in 2011., Airline analysts say that by creating a robust route structure with hundreds of destinations on four continents, the two carriers may be able to attract more frequent fliers and boost revenues. For example, the new American would be able to cut redundancies in service, and become a major player in Boston's Logan International Airport, New York's LaGuardia Airport and Reagan National Airport outside Washington, D.C., Would the merger violate antitrust rules?, The proposed merger would need the approval of both the bankruptcy court and the U.S. Department of Justice. Successfully completing a smooth merger also would mean winning the cooperation of creditors, bondholders, unions, Congress and regulators., February 14, 2013, February 14, 2013, In recent years, with airlines in such dire financial shape, mergers typically have faced some scrutiny but no real roadblocks. The Obama administration already has approved two mega-mergers: United and Continental in 2010, and Southwest and AirTran Airways in 2011. The Bush administration signed off on Delta's merger with Northwest in 2008. Given that history, this latest merger likely would be approved., What would the new company be called?, The combined carrier would be known as American Airlines, and would use the new logo and color scheme already unveiled by American. The updated logo looks like a sleek eagle with one red and one blue wing. And American's planes are being painted with new red, white and blue stripes on their tails., What's likely to happen to fares?, With oil prices generally heading higher, airlines are looking to nudge up fares this year. If American and US Airways were to trim the dozen flights where they overlap, passengers would see less competition, which could create even more upward pressure on fares., An American Airlines 737-800 aircraft featuring the company's new logo sits at a gate at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport in January. American's merger with US Airways would create the largest U.S. airline., An American Airlines 737-800 aircraft featuring the company's new logo sits at a gate at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport in January. American's merger with US Airways would create the largest U.S. airline., But the number of carriers isn't the only factor in pricing. During the Great Recession, airline consolidation increased but fares ticked down. That's because travelers were staying home and oil prices were easing., In any case, with this merger, the Justice Department probably would try to minimize harm to consumers by insisting American give up some airport slots to competitors. For example, the Justice Department is widely expected to insist the combined carrier surrender some of its slots to competitors at Reagan Washington National Airport. American and US Airways together would be too dominant at that airport if they were allowed to keep all of the operations they now have there., Also, airline mergers are complicated because of labor contracts, and they tend to play out over many years, so changes come slowly. Any fare hike may well be a couple of years away., What will this mean for frequent fliers?, This merger could have upsides. Whenever customer-loyalty programs get combined, there are lots of details to work out, so the exact outcome is far from clear. In a news release, the companies said: All miles in both programs will continue to be honored. Upon merger approval, additional information will be provided to customers of both frequent flyer programs ..., It seems likely American's AAdvantage program would survive, and the new company would honor mileage accrued through US Airways' Dividend Miles program., So if you had lots of miles on each of the carriers, the combined total could get you rewards more quickly. And because of the huge route structure, you'd have more places to go on your free reward trips., Would there be any improvement in service?, Whenever airlines merge, there can be lots of short-term problems as staffs and customers get used to the new order. For example, combining online booking systems can produce glitches. But eventually bugs can get worked out., Surveys suggest service has been poor at American in recent years amid union troubles. With US Airways CEO Doug Parker emerging as the combined company's leader, American's service may eventually improve. Under Parker's leadership, US Airways has put together a notably better record than American in terms of on-time arrivals., What would a merger mean for the hub cities?, American has hubs in Dallas/Fort Worth, Chicago, Los Angeles, New York's JFK airport and Miami. US Airways has hubs in Phoenix, Philadelphia and Charlotte. Of those locations, the one most likely to see service cuts in coming years would be Phoenix. With major operations in Dallas and Los Angeles, a Phoenix hub may lose importance., At the very least, Arizona would take a hit in terms of employment and prestige because the combined company's headquarters would be set up in Fort Worth, not Tempe., How would this affect international flights?, Both US Airways and American have flights to Europe, Latin America, and throughout North America and the Caribbean. But they lack service to Asia, the world's fastest-growing travel market., Would this merger end industry consolidation?, It would mark the end of the big deals. Since terrorist attacks shook up the airline industry in 2001, U.S. carriers have been going bankrupt, merging, cutting and doing whatever they can to survive. Assuming this latest merger goes through, the industry will have seen 10 big carriers boil themselves down to just four American, United, Delta and Southwest in a dozen years., Still, there are smaller carriers out there that could be involved in yet more mergers, such as Alaska Airlines and Frontier Airlines. So this latest deal wouldn't necessarily end the industry's move toward fewer competitors with bigger route systems.
The Oracle of Omaha is again showing he's got a taste for companies that make the kinds of food many Americans love., Warren Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway is joining with the Brazilian investment group 3G Capital to buy H.J. Heinz Co. for $23.3 billion. Add in the debt that the new owners will assume and the deal's value grows to $28 billion, Buffett's company says., Berkshire Hathaway already owns Dairy Queen, and 3G Capital bought Burger King in 2010. Now they'll have plenty of ketchup for those chains, to be sure. They also add Heinz's T.G.I. Friday's to their restaurant holdings., The deal, said to be the largest ever in the food industry, pays Heinz shareholders $72.50 in cash for each share., According to the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, Berkshire Hathaway and 3G Capital have pledged to maintain Pittsburgh as [Heinz's] global headquarters, and to fulfill and continue its philanthropic support of community initiatives and related investments.
The boards of American Airlines and US Airways just approved a merger of the two airlines. But the deal still has to win the approval of antitrust regulators at the Justice Department regulators who last month sued to stop a merger between the beer giants Anheuser-Busch InBev and Grupo Modelo, which brews Corona., The antitrust division has dozens of economists on staff. Their job, essentially, is to figure out whether a merger would reduce competition so much that a company could raise prices without losing business to competitors., Sometimes, a company's own documents point the way. The antitrust division can request that companies turn over things like emails, internal company memos, strategic plans and competitor reviews., Occasionally, regulators turn over what they call a hot document, says Joseph Wayland, former head of the antitrust division., A very hot document would be executives at a company analyzing a potential merger and saying, 'If this happens, we will be able to raise our prices 10 percent because our principal competitor has been eliminated,' Wayland says. We've seen documents like that in the government., Antitrust enforcers look at more than just price when they are deciding whether to block a deal. They blocked H&R; Block's acquisition of a company that made TaxACT tax software., This TaxACT story is really what we call a maverick story, says Fiona Scott Morton, another former antitrust regulator., Like H&R; Block and Intuit, TaxACT had free software you could use to file your federal tax return. Unlike H&R; Block and Intuit, the Justice Department argued, TaxACT made a real effort to make its free version a product customers would really want to use., Aggressively giving away a product that other companies are charging for makes a company a maverick. That's good for competition, Morton says., The maverick is helping consumers by disrupting this tacit understanding and coordination among the big firms not to compete too hard, she says. The maverick is breaking that up and really benefiting consumers., The Justice Department won't comment on its pending case against the beer merger., But the complaint regulators filed in court suggests the department may see Grupo Modelo as something of a maverick. It says Modelo has disrupted ABI's pricing strategy by declining to match many of the price increases that were led by ABI and frequently joined by MillerCoors.
Update at 6:50 a.m. ET, Feb. 14: News Is Confirmed., Statements confirming the news that directors of US Airways and American Airlines have agreed to merge the airlines have now been released by both companies., American says:, AMR Corporation (OTCQB: AAMRQ), the parent company of American Airlines, Inc., and US Airways Group, Inc. (NYSE: LCC) today announced that the boards of directors of both companies have unanimously approved a definitive merger agreement under which the companies will combine to create a premier global carrier, which will have an implied combined equity value of approximately $11 billion based on the price of US Airways' stock as of February 13, 2013., US Airways says:, We are pleased to announce that American Airlines and US Airways will combine to create a premier global airline. Our combined airline joins two highly complementary networks with access to the best destinations around the globe. ... The combined company will retain the iconic American Airlines brand name ... [and] will be headquartered in Dallas-Fort Worth and will maintain a significant corporate, operational and hub presence in Phoenix., Our original post Reports: American, US Airways Boards Approve Merge:, The boards of AMR and US Airways have approved a merger Wednesday night that would create the world largest carrier, The Wall Street Journal is reporting citing people familiar with the matter., The paper reports that the merger will be formally announced Thursday., Earlier today, Bloomberg reported on some of the terms of the deal:, While the final terms weren't immediately available, the companies had agreed that AMR creditors would own 72 percent of the new carrier and that US Airways stockholders would get 28 percent, people familiar with the matter have said. US Airways Chief Executive Officer Doug Parker will be CEO, and AMR CEO Tom Horton will be non-executive chairman, the people have said., Horton will receive a performance payment for taking AMR through bankruptcy, with the amount set by the company's creditors committee, a person familiar with that issue said today. His tenure will run until the first joint shareholder meeting or for one year from the closing date, the person said., A US Airways jet rests on the tarmac near an American Airlines plane at Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport in Arlington, Virginia., A US Airways jet rests on the tarmac near an American Airlines plane at Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport in Arlington, Virginia.
Newly redesigned for the 2010 model year, the Buick LaCrosse was found to be one of the most reliable midsize cars, in a study released by J.D. Power and Associates., Newly redesigned for the 2010 model year, the Buick LaCrosse was found to be one of the most reliable midsize cars, in a study released by J.D. Power and Associates., A chart shows the rankings of car brands by the number of problems experienced in three-year-old models, based on a study by J.D. Power and Associates., A chart shows the rankings of car brands by the number of problems experienced in three-year-old models, based on a study by J.D. Power and Associates., In the 2010 model year, the most dependable cars and trucks were either new to the market or had been through a major redesign, according to a study by J.D. Power and Associates. The finding contradicts the traditional stance that consumers should let carmakers work out the bugs in a new model before they buy., What we're finding is that quality is improving so rapidly with newly designed vehicles that that offsets any initial teething troubles the vehicle might have in its first year, says David Sargent, a vice president at J.D. Power., Newly launched or relaunched vehicles outperformed carryover models by a wide gap, reporting 17 fewer problems per 100 vehicles (116 to 133), according to the study released Wednesday. Models that were moderately altered, or refreshed, did even better, with an average of 111 problems reported per 100 vehicles., So, consumers can buy a vehicle the first year it's out on the market, Sargent says, fairly safe in the knowledge that it's going to be as dependable as a vehicle that had carried over from the previous year., The annual study also found that quality has been on the rise after the auto industry's crisis that lingered until 2010., J.D. Power's Vehicle Dependability Study, based on 37,000 consumers who are the original owners of three-year-old SUVs, trucks, and cars, found that the number of problems they reported in the previous 12 months dropped to a new low of 126 per 100 vehicles, a mark not seen since the study began in 1989., Another possible interpretation, he said, is that people who are looking for used cars should be able to find reliable options out there or, if they own a 2010 model already, they might want to stick with the vehicle they own., Sargent says that U.S. carmakers such as GM, Ford, and Dodge played a role in the improvements. Domestic vehicles were responsible for 133 problems reported per 100 vehicles, showing that they improved slightly more rapidly than the imports, he says. Imports generated 123 reported problems per 100 vehicles., Here's a breakdown of how some particular brands and models did:, The problems owners reported range from wind noise to paint and mechanical issues. But if a related story by the AP is any indication, we could be about to enter a new era of car ownership, in which vehicles' electronic gadgetry becomes the source of more complaints., In J.D. Power's study of quality after three months of ownership last year, owners reported more problems with audio, entertainment and navigation systems than with any other vehicle feature, the AP reports.
Minute Suite's 7-by-8-feet rooms offer Wi-Fi, a sofa bed, a television and a workspace. One traveler compared the small spaces to having an MRI done, but others say the idea is overdue at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport., Minute Suite's 7-by-8-feet rooms offer Wi-Fi, a sofa bed, a television and a workspace. One traveler compared the small spaces to having an MRI done, but others say the idea is overdue at Chicago's O'Hare International Airport., When there's a big snowstorm or a plane has mechanical problems, airports often turn into uncomfortable holding pens, with people scrunched in chairs, lying on floors, filling up restaurants and otherwise trying to find something to do., That's actually good news for one company. Minute Suites is building tiny airport retreats across the country. The suites are already operating in Atlanta and Philadelphia. Next up are Dallas-Fort Worth and Chicago's O'Hare International Airport., This idea creating a respite for trapped travelers who don't want to leave the airport and repeat the hassle of going back through security again actually began overseas. Some of those companies even include showers in their suites. Minute Suites co-founder Daniel Solomon says that may come later, but what most people want is a nap on the daybeds., The suites are staffed by college students studying hospitality. Travelers using the rooms can snooze, work on their laptops or watch a movie., Of course, not everyone thinks a tiny private room at the airport is where he'd like to spend his time. The setup is too claustrophobic, says traveler Bernie Kampf. At least from what I've seen, it's like having an MRI done, he says. It's like a tube., It costs about $30 for the first hour of use, then a traveler is billed in 15-minute increments. An overnight stay is $120., Paying by the hour raised the eyebrows of some Chicago aldermen, who had to approve the Minute Suites deal. Think afternoon delight, or a no-tell motel. But Chicago officials say only ticketed passengers can get to the rooms and there's plenty of security, too., Minute Suites is likely to encounter plenty of demand in Chicago. Travel and Leisure magazine, using data from the Bureau of Transportation Statistics, ranked O'Hare International the No. 6 most delayed U.S. airport in 2012. Dallas-Fort Worth and Philadelphia International weighed in at Nos. 10 and 13, respectively.
The Triumph cruise ship, set adrift in the Gulf of Mexico after an engine room fire Sunday, is being towed to Mobile, Alabama. The Carnival cruise ship line has cancelled the ship's next 14 voyages., The Triumph cruise ship, set adrift in the Gulf of Mexico after an engine room fire Sunday, is being towed to Mobile, Alabama. The Carnival cruise ship line has cancelled the ship's next 14 voyages., With the Carnival cruise ship Triumph and its 3,143 passengers now being towed to Mobile, Ala., more reports are emerging from passengers aboard the ship that lost engine power Sunday. They describe a tent city on the upper deck and continuing problems with the sewage system., In an update announced Wednesday afternoon, Carnival says it is now cancelling the Triumph's next 12 trips, in addition to the two that were already canceled. It promised refunds to those who have booked voyages on the ship through April 13., Tuesday night, Carnival's president apologized for the poor conditions that followed the outage and laid out the cruise line's plans for getting more than 3,100 passengers home after they reach Alabama late Wednesday or early Thursday nearly 500 miles from their intended destination of Galveston, Texas., No one here from Carnival is happy about the conditions on board the ship, Carnival Cruise Line president Gerry Cahill said, and we obviously are very, very sorry about what is taking place. There is no question that conditions onboard the ship are very challenging., Every action we are taking is to get our guests home as quickly as possible, Cahill said, and to make them as comfortable as they can be, onboard., At least in terms of public perception, that statement clashed with a story from The Daily Mail, which reports that Carnival CEO Micky Arison attended an NBA game Tuesday night, to watch the Miami Heat a team that he owns play the Portland Trailblazers., As his customers suffer through putrid smells and unbearable temperatures, CEO Micky Arison headed to the American Airlines Arena Tuesday to enjoy a different kind of Heat - the Miami basketball team, reports the Mail., Most of the 23 public bathrooms on the ship are working, along with a good section of guest cabins, Cahill said Tuesday night., Whatever the number of working toilets, it evidently falls short of the needs of more than 4,000 people on the ship, which has a crew of more than 1,000., The worst part is the bathrooms, passenger Donna Gutzman tells NBC News. There's no water. You can't really flush so everyone's going in little plastic baggies and putting it outside their rooms., Jimmy Mowlam, 63, whose son Rob is on his honeymoon on the Triumph, says Rob told him Monday night that the passengers were taking the setbacks in stride, despite a lack of ventilation that left many interior cabins unbearably hot., He said up on deck it looks like a shanty town, with sheets, almost like tents, mattresses, anything else they can pull to sleep on, Mowlam tells the AP., Mowlam also echoed several reports that after an enforced restriction on alcoholic drinks, the crew has now begun providing them for free., Updates about the Triumph have drawn thousands of comments on Carnival's Facebook page, with both former and future passengers airing their concerns. While some commenters who traveled on the ship in the previous two months said they experienced engine problems and delays, other wrote in to say they had enjoyed their cruise., As for the current trip, the only obvious bright side is that none of the passengers or crew were injured as a result of the fire, which the ship's automatic systems extinguished. And because the ship was 150 miles north of the Yucatan Peninsula when the fire struck, the prevailing currents pushed it away from shore and into the open gulf., Since it began operating under emergency generators, Cahill said, the Triumph has been assisted by three other Carnival cruise ships the Elation, the Legend, and the Conquest that were diverted to provide food and supplies., Filling in details about what awaits the passengers when they finally arrive one week after they embarked on a four-day cruise, Cahill said the cruise line has booked more than 1,500 to offer hotel rooms for Thursday night in either Mobile or New Orleans for its guests, to give them an opportunity to rest and relax, and then to fly them home., Carnival has previously said it would provide full refunds to those aboard the Triumph, along with a credit for a future cruise and reimbursement for travel expenses., As the news site AL.com reports, Mobile has its own cruise ship terminal the port once served Carnival cruise ships, a practice that ended in recent years., Carnival says it has arranged more than 20 chartered flights for Friday, when it will convey passengers from Mobile to Houston, a major air hub that is about 50 miles from the Triumph's home port of Galveston. Cahill said that any passengers who would rather start their journey home after arriving Thursday can travel by bus to either Houston or Galveston., When the Triumph makes landfall at Mobile's port, it will be met not only by friends and family members, but also by a team of investigators from the Coast Guard and the National Transportation Safety Board, who will look into the engine room fire and the response from the ship and its crew.
1 of 10, Increasingly, people are continuing to work past 65. Almost a third of Americans between the ages of 65 and 70 are working, and among those older than 75, about 7 percent are still on the job. In Working Late, a series for Morning Edition, NPR profiles older adults who are still in the workforce., Retirement isn't what it used to be, or even when it used to be., Since the late 1970s, the percentage of Americans over 65 who are still working has doubled. Sometimes these people are working because they need the money. But increasingly, people are staying in the workforce into their later years because they're living longer and staying healthy longer., For fitness instructor John David, 73, work means working out. His job is to help older people stay healthy and fit., At one recent hourlong class at the 92nd Street Y in New York City, he leads more than 30 people in stretching and flexing every single part of their bodies. David demonstrates every movement for his class. If he teaches two classes in a day, then he goes through the workout twice., And he looks up to it. He's tall and lean, just the way you'd picture someone who spent decades as a runner and a gym rat., John David, 73, teaches an exercise class to seniors in New York City. His routine goes through every muscle, including those on the face., John David, 73, teaches an exercise class to seniors in New York City. His routine goes through every muscle, including those on the face., In his class, students bounce in time to music, sometimes standing on one leg while extending the other to the front, back and sides. Some hold on to the backs of their chairs. Some don't need to. It looks like a kind of free-form hokey pokey, without the circle. Everyone is smiling., This turned out to be the real calling. This turned out to be the thing I am good at, and you can see that people respond, so it's rewarding, David says., It wasn't always his calling. He used to live in Los Angeles and work in TV production. He was also spending a lot of time in the gym, and he noticed something about the people there., If you were pretty, if you were handsome and you were fit, you got a lot of help from the trainers a lot of help. And if you were funny looking or overweight or awkward or had gray hair, not so much, David says. And I thought the people who need the stuff are not getting it., So in his mid-50s, David decided to become a certified trainer he was looking to get out of television anyway. He tried to get a job at his gym., They said, 'We're not hiring right now.' Well, two or three days later, they hired somebody, but they were young, he says., So David started out volunteering in retirement communities until it turned into paying work. By the time he moved to New York 15 years ago, he had a resume. He now teaches at several community centers around Manhattan, and has a few private clients. It's not full-time work, and he doesn't make a lot of money, but he loves being able to give older adults what they need from a fitness routine., I take it from my own experience. The things that you need at my age ... are entirely different than what you need when you're 35, and you're thinking about your beach body and sexual prowess or whatever, he says., For people in their 70s, 80s and 90s, exercise is about something much more fundamental, he says. Can I live my life? Can I get out of a chair? Can I walk to the store? Can I be the person I want to be?, &ldquo; This turned out to be the real calling. This turned out to be the thing I am good at, and you can see that people respond, so it's rewarding., - John David, a fitness instructor at 73, His routine goes through every muscle group, including facial and eye muscles., Everything's gotta work ... every body part, particularly your eyes, he says. And moving your neck. And when you go out in the street, you have to turn your head. You wanna see that pizza delivery guy on the bike; you wanna see the cab coming., David's students know that they're being taught by one of their own., Mimi Rockmore, 93, has been in David's class about a year. I like it that he's older, that he understands what hurts and what doesn't, she says., And they know that exercise can help them hang on to what they've got and keep the bad stuff from getting worse whether it's improving endurance or fighting osteoporosis or staying mentally sharp., David intends to keep teaching his classes as long as he's strong enough., I don't know how long it will work, but I'll do it as long as I can as long as I think I'm having an effect, having a good effect, he says., Do you have a story to share about someone who is staying in the workforce beyond the traditional retirement years? Tell us more in the comments section below.
An NBC store is seen through a window reflecting Rockefeller Center in New York City. Comcast, the nation's largest cable company, has owned 51 percent of NBCUniversal since 2011., An NBC store is seen through a window reflecting Rockefeller Center in New York City. Comcast, the nation's largest cable company, has owned 51 percent of NBCUniversal since 2011., Comcast Corp. said Tuesday it will complete its buyout of NBCUniversal from GE for about $16.7 billion, ahead of schedule. Comcast, the nation's largest cable company, has owned 51 percent of NBCUniversal since their $28 billion merger in 2011., NBCUniversal owns several familiar news and entertainment brands, including NBC, CNBC, Universal Pictures, Telemundo, USA Network and Universal Parks and Resorts., Our decision to acquire GE's ownership is driven by our sense of optimism for the future prospects of NBCUniversal and our desire to capture future value that we hope to create for our shareholders, Comcast Chairman and CEO Brian Roberts in a statement Tuesday., Comcast also announced that NBCUniversal will buy from GE the properties used by NBCUniversal at 30 Rockefeller Plaza and CNBC's headquarters in Englewood Cliffs, N.J., for about $1.4 billion., The completion of the buyout comes several years early, as Comcast takes advantage of low borrowing costs and what CEO Brian Roberts calls a 'very attractive price,' the Associated Press reported., Comcast had planned to take a larger stake in [NBCUniversal] over seven years, paying for it from operating cash, AP said., But Roberts told The Associated Press that the sale of its stake in pay TV network A&E; and some wireless spectrum gave it plenty of cash on hand. He also says Comcast got a good deal given that the stock price of media conglomerates has been rising.
Women are paid significantly less, on average, than men even when they're doing the same jobs. But the gap varies dramatically for workers in different jobs., The Bureau of Labor Statistics sent us some data on how much women made in comparison to their male counterparts in hundreds of different jobs; here are the jobs where the wage gap is smallest, and those where the gap is biggest. The gap is based on comparisons of full-time workers., Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, Part of the gap in pay is driven by choices, even within single job categories. Among physicians, for example, women are more likely than men to choose lower-paid specialties (though this does not explain all of the pay gap among doctors)., And among all workers, women are more likely than men to take a significant time off from work to raise children, and they tend to be re-hired at lower wages than their counterparts who remained in the workforce., But not all of the difference be explained by choices such as these. And some of the gap could be due to simple discrimination, Ana Llena-Nozal, an economist at the OECD, told me., One other detail worth noting: The jobs where the gap is biggest pay more, on average, than the jobs where the gap is lowest. The average weekly pay is $1,087 for jobs where the gap is biggest, and $773 for jobs where the gap is smallest.
Two tugs tow and steer the Carnival Triumph cruise ship in the Gulf of Mexico Tuesday. The ship is headed to Mobile, Ala., after an engine room fire on Sunday., Two tugs tow and steer the Carnival Triumph cruise ship in the Gulf of Mexico Tuesday. The ship is headed to Mobile, Ala., after an engine room fire on Sunday., Passengers aboard the cruise ship Triumph, set adrift after an engine fire Sunday, will now wait until Thursday before what was billed as a four-day cruise finally ends, the Carnival cruise ship line says. Strong currents have pushed the ship another 90 miles into the Gulf of Mexico, foiling plans to tow it to Progreso, Mexico., The news comes as those aboard the ship have been reaching out to loved ones on shore to describe life on the stricken vessel, marked by a lack of air conditioning and ventilation below decks, improvised toilets, and sleeping on the open deck., Update at 3:25 p.m. ET: Investigation Announced, The Coast Guard and the National Transportation Safety Board are investigating the fire aboard the Triumph, the agencies said Tuesday. Their inquiry will focus on what caused the engine room fire, as well as the response from the ship's crew and fire-suppression system., The agencies' roles may be somewhat limited, because the Triumph is not U.S.-flagged. According to the Coast Guard, Because the Carnival Triumph is a Bahamian flagged vessel, the Bahamas Maritime Authority is the primary investigative agency., Our original post continues:, Tuesday morning, the Coast Guard reported that two tugs the Resolve Pioneer and Dabhol are now towing the cruise ship to Mobile. The cutter Vigorous has been shadowing the Triumph in the gulf., A picture of life on the ship has emerged on the Cruise Critic website, where friends and relatives of passengers have passed along details gleaned from phone calls and texts. Here's a sampling:, Wmiller86 (February 11, 2:11 p.m.) My wife and 3 of her girlfriends are on the Triumph... My wife was able to call me Sunday night for a few minutes while Elation was alongside. My wife told me that it was pretty scary during the fire evacuation... She said that they were allowed back down into the cabins after awhile, but it is so hot that you cannot sleep down there. So they had set up a makeshift tent over deck loungers to sleep in. At the time I spoke to here, there was no toilets. They were using little red bags. And no running water, no lights, except emergency lighting., She said it was already pretty miserable. No hot food and no alcohol being served. There was still ice being served in soft drinks. None of the shops were open., LynnA (February 11, 4:28 p.m.) We just got a text from daughter-in-law. She said she was miserable but no worries., Wmiller86 (February 11, 10:14 p.m.) I just rec'd a text from my wife. - NO POTTIES ARE WORKING! That was all it said., One passenger also reported being told they might not make landfall until Friday., In a statement released Monday night, Carnival President and CEO Gerry Cahill said, Currently, public and cabin toilets are operational in certain sections of the ship, power has been restored to a limited number of elevators, and some power in the Lido dining area is providing for hot coffee and limited hot food service., As we reported yesterday, the Triumph has been resupplied by other Carnival cruise ships. And as news spread of its woes, former passengers who had recently sailed aboard the ship commented online that their trip had been marred by engine problems, forcing a five-hour delay., The decision to reroute the Triumph to Alabama was spurred by currents that pushed the 100,000-ton cruise ship nearly equidistant to Mobile and Progreso, according to Carnival officials. The cruise line had earlier said the ship would arrive in Mexico late Wednesday; instead, it's on a 270-mile journey across the gulf that will end late Thursday., The change in destination is expected to simplify the return process for passengers, 900 of whom were not traveling with passports., The Triumph has operated on emergency generator power since early Sunday, but the 3,143 passengers have been confronted with toilet outages in at least half of the nearly 900-feet-long ship, even as they saw three extra days added to their Caribbean cruise. No injuries have been reported on the Triumph, which sailed from Galveston, Texas, last Thursday.
Jack Lew testifies before a House budget panel in 2011. The Senate Finance Committee is scheduled to consider Lew's nomination to be Treasury secretary on Wednesday., Jack Lew testifies before a House budget panel in 2011. The Senate Finance Committee is scheduled to consider Lew's nomination to be Treasury secretary on Wednesday., Jack Lew, the man President Obama has chosen to help oversee the country's biggest banks, has said it plainly he's no expert on banking. Lew said as much when the Senate was vetting him to head the White House Office of Management and Budget in 2010., Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., asked Lew if he thought deregulation of Wall Street caused the financial crisis. Lew said he didn't consider himself the best person to answer that question., I don't consider myself an expert in some of these aspects of the financial industry, Lew said. My experience in the financial industry has been as a manager, not as an investment adviser., On Wednesday, Lew will again face a confirmation hearing, this time to be Treasury secretary. Members of the Senate Finance Committee are expected to question him about his knowledge of financial markets and his brief stint at Citigroup between the Clinton and Obama administrations., Just A Manager, Insisting he was just a manager may be the way Lew will wash his hands of a messy time at Citigroup, when he was chief operating officer for one of the bank's riskiest investment units. By calling himself a manager at Citigroup, he can suggest he wasn't the one who made some of the financially disastrous decisions there., And actually, for Lew's defenders now, manager already seems to be the go-to word. Robert Rubin, a former Treasury secretary and ex-Citigroup chairman, seized on the term during a recent phone interview. He's the one who helped Lew get a job at Citi., That was a job that required somebody who had managerial effectiveness, and Jack had been a very effective manager of the government and a very effective manager at NYU, and that's what they were looking for manager, Rubin said., To some people, the word manager suggests you're one of the people in charge, and they can't help but notice that Lew was at the helm of a company that suffered such massive losses Citigroup got the biggest federal government bailout of any bank., Republican Sen. Chuck Grassley of Iowa said he wants to know exactly what role Lew played in those losses., Did he contribute to the conditions at Citi that led to the bailout? Grassley asked., He also pointed out that Lew received a $940,000 bonus from Citigroup shortly before the bank got bailed out., I think we ought to know whether or not he gave Wall Street any favors, because he has to be independent from special interest and put the taxpayers first in this new role that he's playing, Grassley said., A No-Drama Guy, But to some, questions like these are just an attempt to create drama around someone who is described as a no-drama guy., Lew is a quiet, bookish man behind glasses, a Washington power broker with a soft step. He has the resume of that kid in school who seems to be good at everything: He was White House budget director twice, a top administrator at New York University, deputy secretary of state and chief of staff to the president., Now Lew is in a strange situation. While some people say he may have been too close with Wall Street, others say one of his best qualifications for the Treasury job is his distance from the financial world., Right after a huge crash in the financial markets, I at least would not think it would be the right image for a secretary of the Treasury to have spent his life on Wall Street, said Alice Rivlin, one of Lew's predecessors as head of the White House budget office. So Jack has had, I think, just about the right amount of experience in the financial community., Lew didn't seem to have his sights set on a Wall Street career when he was growing up in Queens, N.Y., At 12, he was handing out fliers for Eugene McCarthy's presidential campaign. By the time he was 23, he was a top aide to then-House Speaker Tip O'Neill. Lew spent the next three decades as a fixture in Washington, departing on weekends for his home in New York, where he and his wife have a place in an affluent section of the Bronx called Riverdale., Devotion To His Faith, Friends like Rabbi Levi Shemtov describe Lew as a humble man who doesn't like to attract attention., When he walks into synagogue, and not just ours, but any because everyone who goes to the other places he prays at says the same thing that when he walks in, it's like any usual congregant. No fuss, no muss, said Shemtov. It's never about him, and he never wants it to be about him., Despite having worked for years in Washington under two different presidents, Lew is hardly a household name. Most of the chatter around him, so far, has been from handwriting experts analyzing his loopy, indecipherable signature, which will appear on all U.S. currency if he's confirmed., Those close to Lew often comment on how deeply committed he is to his Orthodox Jewish faith, and the great lengths he'll go to observe the Sabbath under his hectic schedule. This means no email, no phone and no riding in cars from sundown every Friday to sundown Saturday., Lobbyist Steve Elmendorf remembers spotting Lew at the airport one Friday afternoon with a briefcase full of blank paper., You know, it was in the middle of some budget crisis. He said, 'I'm not allowed to communicate electronically, but they can fax me stuff. So I have to have a lot of paper to put in the fax machine,' Elmendorf said with a laugh., Supporters of Lew say they dare senators to come up with anything truly controversial to say about him., The most recent brouhaha seems to be over Lew's failure to comply with a little-known legal requirement involving Medicare funding. If Medicare trustees release a warning that the program is in bad financial shape, the White House budget chief is supposed to send a legislative proposal to Congress to resolve the issue. Lew never did that, and Republicans say they just may block his confirmation for that.
With too little distilled bourbon to meet demand, Maker's Mark is lowering the product's alcohol content from 90 to 84 proof., With too little distilled bourbon to meet demand, Maker's Mark is lowering the product's alcohol content from 90 to 84 proof., Kentucky is bourbon country. Bar shelves in Louisville are stocked with a crowded field of premium bourbons; the city's Theater Square Marketplace restaurant alone carries close to 170 different brands. So when news trickled out that longtime distillery Maker's Mark plans to water down its bourbon, locals were stunned., Bourbon has to be aged at least two years and that's where Maker's Mark got in trouble. Chief Operating Officer Rob Samuels says the company simply didn't make enough., The phones have been ringing off the hook over the last three or four months from most every city in the country where Maker's Mark is not available, Samuels says. As far away as California and as close to home as the package store five minutes from the distillery., Now, the company says it must spread the remaining supply over more bottles to meet growing demand. The Maker's Mark label will now read 84 proof instead of the traditional 90., The Samuels family invented Maker's Mark six decades ago and has been distilling in Kentucky even longer than that. The company prides itself on quality and tradition. Its slogan used to be, It tastes expensive ... and is., Samuels says keeping that signature taste, despite weakening the drink, was key., But maintaining flavor is one thing maintaining the company's image is another. People might not notice a change in the taste, but they are likely to notice that the price isn't going down., My initial reaction was, that's how bourbons that are not premium brands would deal with it, says Jason Falls, a marketing professional who has worked with Maker's Mark in the past. Knob Creek had a similar shortage in 2009, he says, and I believe the way the brand dealt with it was they sent T-shirts to all their ambassadors that said, 'I survived the drought ... of 2009.' , It's unclear if Maker's Mark's move will hurt the brand's global reach. But in Kentucky bourbon country locals aren't too happy with the change., It's gotten ... a lot of outrage, says Sara Havens, who writes about the bar scene for the Louisville Eccentric Observer newspaper. People asking if they're going to lower the price now, [or] just that it's kind of not fair., Havens says she'll still drink Maker's Mark, but probably less often. [When] you go to a bar and you know one drink is watered down and the other drink is potent, you always go to the potent one, she says., To avoid another shortage, Maker's Mark is planning to expand operations and they're not alone. In Kentucky, there are now more barrels of bourbon than there are people. So even if an old standby like Maker's Mark is hard to find, there'll always be something to drink.
In a photo from 1999, the Carnival Cruise line Carnival Triumph, foreground, arrives in Miami. Measuring 893 feet in length, the ship has been adrift in the Gulf of Mexico for more than 24 hours, after a fire hit its engines., In a photo from 1999, the Carnival Cruise line Carnival Triumph, foreground, arrives in Miami. Measuring 893 feet in length, the ship has been adrift in the Gulf of Mexico for more than 24 hours, after a fire hit its engines., More than 3,000 cruise ship passengers who thought they'd be heading home today have instead been told they'll remain in the Gulf of Mexico until Wednesday, stranded by an engine fire that set their ship, the Triumph, adrift. Onboard power and sewer system outages have been reported. The ship, which was 150 miles north of the Yucatan Peninsula when the fire struck early Sunday, has a crew of more than 1,000., The Carnival cruise line says no injuries have been reported aboard the Triumph, which was scheduled to end its trip at its home port of Galveston, Texas, Monday. But after a fire that the Coast Guard says left it dead in the water, the ship was forced to take on new provisions at sea, thanks to a rendezvous with another Carnival cruise ship, the Elation, Sunday., This morning, the Cruise Critic website reported that portions of the Triumph's sewage system had been restored, but outages persist. The Triumph has been operating on emergency generator power since its automated fire suppression system extinguished the fire Sunday, according to the ship's cruise line., The cutter Vigorous arrived to assist the ship early Monday morning, the Coast Guard says. Tug boats are now sailing to the Triumph to begin towing it to the nearest port, in Progreso, Mexico. The ship, which weighs a bit more than 100,000 tons, should arrive late Wednesday, Carnival says., Passengers will be flown home from Progreso aboard chartered planes, Carnival said in a statement released at 11:25 a.m. ET Monday. The cruise line also said that public and cabin toilets are operational in certain sections of the ship, power has been restored to a limited number of elevators, and some power in the Lido dining area is providing for hot coffee and limited hot food service., Another cruise ship is scheduled to deliver supplies to the Triumph Monday, according to Cruise Critic, which also gathered information from its members' message boards to paint a picture of what's going on aboard the Triumph. Here's a sampling from last night:, Cruise Critic member Clinty76, who says his wife and mother-in-law are onboard, posted this note from his wife on the message boards: 'We are about to get supplies from another cruise ship and apparently the tug boats should be here tomorrow around noon ... We have no power AT ALL, which means we can't use the toilets, wash our hands, or take a shower.', Another member, jgomila198101, said that her sister called and relayed the following: 'They have plenty of food. They are all fine, but doesn't look like they will be back until Wednesday night. Said they are still having fun and gave me the task to call her boss who seems to think I was lying LOL. OH WELL glad they are enjoying the extended vacation.', On the Cruise Industry News website, several readers wrote in to say that they had traveled on the Triumph, and that the ship had experienced propulsion problems during their journey, as recently as Jan. 28. One passenger noted that the ship was five hours late in arriving at Galveston., You're right, it doesn't sound like they fixed the problem after our cruise, one woman wrote. Not good., Carnival says that after the crew realized the Triumph wouldn't be able to make it to port under its own power, the company informed all the passengers' emergency contacts. It has promised a full refund to passengers, along with a credit for a future trip, and reimbursement of all shipboard purchases during the voyage, with the exception of gift shop and casino charges. The cruise line has also cancelled the Triumph's next two planned voyages.
You'd think tropical fruit would be everywhere on a Caribbean island. But we had to search fairly hard to find these beauties., You'd think tropical fruit would be everywhere on a Caribbean island. But we had to search fairly hard to find these beauties., To be clear, the trip I took a couple of weeks ago to Puerto Rico with an NPR team was not about food. We headed down to the island to report on the economic and crime troubles that are driving people off the island and to Florida in record numbers. And though we did tons of advance research about census figures and crime statistics, none of us really looked up good places to eat., In a tropical, Latin land, we assumed we'd be practically stumbling over savory local meals and exotic fruits., The reality? Not so much., When we asked for fruit juice, our options would be orange or maybe apple. And though we kept watch for roadside food stands as we drove miles across the island, we saw very few., We also searched high and low for delicious guanabana. Alas, it took us days to find it, and when we did, it was frozen, and $5 a pound., But here's the fascinating part. Wilo Benet, a Puerto Rican celebrity chef (we're talking Top Chef Masters), says our culinary hunt actually illustrates the strange economics of food on the island: For the most part, what's grown there is exported, and the vast majority of what's eaten by islanders 80 percent or more, according to some sources is actually imported, largely from the mainland U.S., Puerto Rican mangoes and passion fruit, Benet says, mostly end up in London grocery stores. And though we have tremendous fish here, he says, New York will pay top dollar for it. A fisherman would never make [that kind of] money here., Meanwhile, that guanabana? It was probably so hard to find and so expensive because it was shipped in from elsewhere, Benet tells me., That's because in the middle of the 20th century, Puerto Rico's leaders pushed to modernize the island, which quickly transformed from an agricultural economy to an industrial one., NPR host David Greene shows off a guanabana purchased after a long search for one in Puerto Rico., NPR host David Greene shows off a guanabana purchased after a long search for one in Puerto Rico., Puerto Rican agriculture virtually collapsed, writes Gustavo Setrini, who studies the island's economy at the MIT Center For International Studies., The consequences are evident in a striking anecdote Benet shared with me. Back in 1996, when he was cooking for the Puerto Rican committee in Atlanta during the Summer Olympics, he says, it was easier for me in Atlanta, Ga., to buy a case of Puerto Rican breadfruit than it is for me to do that at my restaurant in San Juan., And here's another funny thing: Back in San Juan, when we'd ask for restaurant recommendations, locals sent us to sushi and taco joints. True traditional, down home-style places are not that many, Benet says, speaking from Pikayo, his contemporary, fine dining restaurant in San Juan., There are some hole-in-the-wall-kiosks that are hard to find, he says, and a burgeoning fine dining scene. But restaurants with simple, traditional Puerto Rican fare?, Those kinds of places are hard to keep open, since modern palates demand fusion menus and American classics, he says. So unless you know a good local home cook, good luck., Still, it's worth doing your culinary research before heading to the island, because fantastic local meals can be found, says Maricel Presilla, an expert on pan-Latin cuisine., Mofongo, she says a local staple of mashed green plantains, often filled with meat or seafood can be a thing of wonder., If only I had called her before I left.
Brookfield, Vt., residents fear that Postal Service changes will eventually lead to the closing of their small town post office. About 1,300 people live in Brookfield, according to 2010 U.S. Census figures., Brookfield, Vt., residents fear that Postal Service changes will eventually lead to the closing of their small town post office. About 1,300 people live in Brookfield, according to 2010 U.S. Census figures., In rural Vermont, the U.S. Postal Service decision to discontinue Saturday letter delivery is yet another blow to an institution that's long been a fixture of village life., Last year, the U.S. Postal Service abandoned plans to close thousands of small post offices, opting instead to cut hours. But there are fears the cuts will continue until the rural post office is no more., Two highways lead to the village of Brookfield, Vt., but the pavement ends where the village begins., For years, Brookfield residents have famously resisted any plan to improve the bumpy dirt road that serves as their main drag. But they recognize that the rest of the world is changing., It's been a long time since cartoonist Ed Koren used the mail for work. There are now faster ways for him to get his drawings from Brookfield to his editors at The New Yorker magazine. But Koren still uses the village's tiny post office for personal correspondence., Brookfield is one of more than 140 Vermont post offices facing cuts in retail hours. Some will operate as few as two hours daily., Koren suspects that one day there won't be a local rural post office., If they curtail services, fewer people will come. Fewer people will use it and then the justification for getting rid of it altogether, he says., Even without a post office, rural customers get their mail delivered, and online services make it possible to send packages from home., But there's no general store in Brookfield, so the post office is part of the village's social life., At an impromptu gathering there this week the consensus was that losing Saturday letter delivery isn't so bad., Restaurant owner Lee Duberman says what hurts is the cumulative effect of ongoing reductions in hours and services., They've been cutting and cutting and cutting so I assume they're going to continue to cut. And, us, out here, we're feeling more and more cut off, I think, she says. , Like many people, Duberman uses the mail less than in the past. She pays bills and does a lot of her restaurant's business online., That's not so easy for Vermonters still out of reach of broadband service or those like Bonnie Fallon who is concerned about online privacy., I am an old dinosaur and will not pay any bills online. You know, and I'm going to be left behind, she says. I know that., The village of Randolph Center is about eight miles from Brookfield. Most weekday mornings customers settle into rocking chairs at the back of Floyd's General Store to drink coffee and solve the world's problems., The feeling here is that the cuts are necessary even if they lead to closing the post office. That's business, says Perry Armstrong., I think that change is here. If they gotta close it, they gotta close it, he says. , Later this month the postal service will reduce retail hours at the Randolph Center post office., People often drop their packages at the general store for owner Al Floyd to walk over to the post office when it's open. Floyd thinks eventually the postal service will shut it down entirely., I think they will but they're going to take the heart right out of the town, he says. It gives it a name. I mean, we got a ZIP code!, As Floyd sees it, the presence of a post office is part of what makes a village a village.
The No. 1 song in the country right now is Thrift Shop by Macklemore and Ryan Lewis, a rap group out of Seattle. Their claim to fame: They got the song to the top of the chart by themselves, without being signed by a major label., They've bragged about this success in a video spoof and on Twitter., But the story they've been telling the story that's been widely reported is not entirely true., The truth is that Macklemore and Ryan Lewis hired a company to help them get their music into stores. That company, Alternative Distribution Alliance, is an arm of Warner Music Group, one of the most major of the major labels., Still, the rise of Thrift Shop is something new. It's an indication of a power shift away from the major labels to the artist themselves. Clearly, Macklemore and Ryan Lewis accomplished a lot on their own., The rap group spent their early years hustling and playing small clubs like a lot of acts. But they also used technology to build a devoted following on Twitter, Tumblr and YouTube., They eventually got to the point where their touring was so successful that they could have been signed by a major label., Instead, they went a different route. Macklemore and Ryan Lewis took the money they'd made from touring and made their own album a process that digital technology has made much cheaper., To get their album to the top of the charts though, they needed help., You really cannot get a radio hit at this point without major label backing, says Gary Trust from Billboard., Even in today's world of iTunes and YouTube, you still need the radio to become a superstar, Trust says. So Macklemore and Ryan Lewis hired Warner Music Group to get the band more radio play. That helped propel Thrift Shop to No. 1., Yes, artists can do a lot on their own today. But to get to the top of the charts, they still have to work with a major label.
Tourists take photographs in front of the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 2, the day after Congress passed a bill to avoid the fiscal cliff., Tourists take photographs in front of the U.S. Capitol on Jan. 2, the day after Congress passed a bill to avoid the fiscal cliff., Congress likes to say it no longer does earmarks, the provisions that direct federal dollars to serve local interests or campaign supporters. And though that may be true, it's also a fact that targeted provisions are still useful in moving legislation even critical legislation like the bill that pulled Washington back from the fiscal cliff last month., The American Taxpayer Relief Act did three big things: It extended the Bush-era tax cuts for low- and middle-income Americans; it allowed a tax increase on the wealthiest taxpayers; and it continued benefits for unemployed workers., All of that took 30 pages of legislative language. But the bill runs 157 pages., Many of those extra pages deal with a leadership dilemma, says Scott Lilly, a veteran congressional appropriations staffer who's now with the liberal Center for American Progress., You need support and you're not getting it, and what interest do those people have? he explains., Those people have votes the leadership needs. So their interest gets added to the bill., That's usually called an engine, he says. It passes legislation., That nice old metaphor comes from the age of railroads. Here, one big engine would be tax extenders special tax breaks that Congress gives to different industries. They amount to about one-third of the bill., By custom, Congress doesn't make the extenders permanent. So every couple of years, all of those provisions get lobbied for all over again. Just as an example, one big extender renews a corporate tax write-off for the expenses of research and development., The R&D; tax credit is a motherhood and apple pie issue, says Monica McGuire of the National Association of Manufacturers. She helped to lead a lobbying coalition called the Broad Tax Extenders Group, which has hundreds of members, ranging from General Electric to the Association of Kentucky Fried Chicken Franchisees., We just kept pounding the pavement, she says. We kept up the communications. We were doing a lot of Hill meetings., McGuire says the manufacturers association and the tax extenders coalition were lobbying all through 2012. The final negotiations on the bill were behind closed doors, with Vice President Joe Biden, Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., and few others. Still, McGuire says her team was plugged in from the beginning to the successful end., We found out probably within a half-hour of when members of Congress and their staffs found out, McGuire says., The tax extenders were hardly the only engines on this train. For instance, another provision extended enough farm subsidies to bring rural lawmakers onboard. But other provisions in the American Taxpayer Relief Act were just along for the ride., There are pieces of legislation that can't get passed on their own, but if they add it to a larger bill it'll get pulled along by the train, says Lilly, the former congressional appropriations staffer. And that's often called the caboose., Take the section on Medicare. Congress needed money to maintain pay standards for Medicare physicians. To help finance that, the bill squeezes payments to dialysis providers., And in that provision on dialysis coverage, there's a little caboose: It exempts some dialysis drugs from the new lower limits. The drug maker Amgen had been lobbying on that for months. So now the exemption covers Amgen's fast-growing new drug, Sensipar., Amgen says this isn't a gift simply a continuation of current standards. The company declined to comment on tape., Steve Ellis, vice president of the advocacy group Taxpayers for Common Sense, says things like the Amgen provision fuel voter cynicism., He says Amgen's obscure item and most of these other provisions shouldn't have been in the fiscal cliff bill to begin with., It was a very, very, very serious issue, he says. And yet they mucked it up with a whole bunch of extraneous materials., Of course, Congress has other very, very serious fiscal bills coming down the track. And each time one of those bills leaves the metaphorical station, it might well have a string of special little cabooses clattering along behind.
But are you happy?, But are you happy?, In recent years, Canada, France and Britain have added measures of citizen happiness to their official national statistics. The U.S. government is now considering adopting a happiness index as well., This makes a certain amount of sense. Everything a government does hiring soldiers, building bridges, providing pensions is supposed to make citizens happy., Economists and psychologists have been collecting happiness data for decades. They can quantify how unhappy noise pollution makes people who live near an airport. They know that people hate commuting and that we get less anxious as we get older., But once you get into the details, there's a lot of debate over the happiness data. One big divide: Should you ask people how they're feeling right now, or how they feel about their life in general?, You get different answers depending on what you ask. Which one is more important is a squishy, philosophical question., It turns out, though, that lots of economic data get squishy when you take a close look., In the U.S, in order to be counted as unemployed, you have to be out of a job and looking for work. But what counts as looking for work? Checking Craigslist? Sending out three resumes a week? Five?, It's actually kind of a hard question, says Justin Wolfers, an economist at the University of Michigan. It's very subjective., Yet every month, a single unemployment number is released. Unemployment is now 7.9 percent. And, right now, a panel is looking to come up with a similar number for happiness. Someday soon, we may start hearing news reports about how U.S. happiness is rising. Or falling.
1 of 11, Thursday marks the beginning of New York Fashion Week, where big-name designers like Michael Kors, Anna Sui and Vera Wang will debut their Fall 2013 collections. It's part of an industry that generates billions of dollars of revenue for New York City, employing hundreds of thousands of workers. But the real business of fashion happens several blocks south of the glamorous Lincoln Center runways, in New York's Garment District., For nearly a century, the streets just below Times Square have hatched and sustained many successful American labels. Women's wear designer Ann Yee, who started her own label in 2009, is hoping the same will happen for her., Style Clash, Just days before her Fall 2013 presentation, Yee is counting zippers 50 pearl-colored, invisible nylon zippers for 50 dresses. She purchases the zippers from Sil Thread on West 38th Street in the heart of the Garment District. The price, with a 10 percent discount, which she receives for buying in bulk, is $45. Yee then walks a block over to the factory she's contracted to produce her garments and hands them off to a seamstress., This is Yee's daily life since deciding to start her own label., When she doesn't have an intern, which is most days, she's running the errands herself: first to the zipper store, then to the factory, then back out to buy a yard of silk and returning again to the factory. The disparity between the grimy wholesale shops and factories and the refined finish product is apparent., &ldquo; It's not that pretty. I'm going to be honest with you. It's not the most visually appealing place in the city. But there's just so many resources that you can't deny it., - Ann Yee, fashion designer, It's not that pretty, Yee says, describing the West Side Manhattan neighborhood. I'm going to be honest with you. It's not the most visually appealing place in the city. But there's just so many resources that you can't deny it., Sustaining A New Generation, A recent survey found that 47 percent of New York's designers say they have their samples prototypes of what you eventually see in stores made in the Garment District., According to a 2012 report published by the Design Trust for Public Space, apparel production is the largest manufacturing division in New York City. It provides 24,000 jobs citywide with about 7,100 of those jobs centered in the Garment District. Within the district alone, those jobs generate $2.1 billion of economic output., Citywide, the fashion industry employs 173,000 people, generating $10 billion annually., It's also a business that helps young designers realize their dreams. Daniel Vosovic, who started his women's wear collection in 2010, produces all of his garments in New York City., I can definitively say that I wouldn't be here if the garment center didn't exist, he says, because the samples were done by a patternmaker locally; they were cut and sewn by a sample room locally; my showroom is local., Today, outside Vosovic's studio space, you can hear the sounds of new construction, but not long ago it seemed like the district had outlived its own usefulness. Increasingly, designers were choosing to outsource their production to countries with cheap labor, abandoning midtown manufacturers., Maybe for the giants maybe Donna Karan doesn't need it. Maybe Ralph Lauren doesn't necessarily need it. But we wouldn't survive. We wouldn't even have gotten the chance to get off the ground if the Garment District didn't still exist, Vosovic says., Vosovic isn't the only one who feels that way. In a survey by the New York City Economic Development Corp., 80 percent of emerging designers said they needed the Garment District for production., 'Made In NYC', Meanwhile, Vosovic's business is healthy. Just this season, his Spring 2013 collection was picked up by 23 new stores, and he plans to launch his own e-commerce site. But he still doesn't have the minimum orders needed to produce large quantities overseas. His rented studio on West 38th Street is part of an incubator program sponsored by the Council of Fashion Designers of America., The program, which started in 2010, helps 12 designers get their start by offering them mentorships with industry leaders and discounted rent on studios within the Garment District., &ldquo; I made so many mistakes in the beginning. So much waste and so many problems happened. If I had been trying to manage it overseas, I would have surely gone out of business, - Nanette Lepore, fashion designer, Successful designers say it's essential that young designers have control over their production process., I made so many mistakes in the beginning. So much waste and so many problems happened, says veteran designer Nanette Lepore, a member of the Council of Fashion Designers of America. If I had been trying to manage it overseas, I would have surely gone out of business., Lepore, whose revenues now reach $90 million annually, got her start in the Garment District. She says the sewers, patternmakers and suppliers were more than just sources of labor they also taught her lessons along the way., For me it just makes sense. It's like a no-brainer. It's right here, Lepore says. The factories mentored me all the way through the process because it's a hard industry to understand., She says if U.S. craftsmanship were a dress a garment Lepore is particularly known for she would describe it as a strapless dress that won't slide down., Despite her success, Lepore continues to produce 80 percent of her garments in midtown, with a label that reads Made in NYC. It's what Yee and Vosovic say they'll do even when they've grown from emerging to established designers.
Pieces of damaged electrode coils from a battery cell that resulted in a fire aboard a Japan Airlines Boeing 787 Dreamliner airplane at Logan International Airport in Boston., Pieces of damaged electrode coils from a battery cell that resulted in a fire aboard a Japan Airlines Boeing 787 Dreamliner airplane at Logan International Airport in Boston., The head of National Transportation Safety Board said today that the FAA should reconsider their approval of the Dreamliner's lithium-ion battery., Essentially, the NTSB Chairman Deborah Hersman said during a news conference, what Boeing told the FAA about the risks involving the battery have proved different in practice., The New York Times explains that Boeing said the batteries on the new 787 planes were likely to emit smoke less than once in every 10 million flight hours., Once the planes started flying, however, smoke came out of the batteries twice last month in fewer than 100,000 hours of commercial flights., Not only that, reports the AP, but Boeing also said that any short circuit within the battery would be contained to a single cell. The NTSB found that in the case of the Japan Airlines 787 that caught fire in Boston, the the fire started with multiple short-circuits in one of the battery's eight cells. That spread to the other seven cells and created an uncontrolled chemical reaction known as 'thermal runaway.', This investigation has demonstrated that a short-circuit in a single cell can propagate to adjacent cells and result in smoke and fire, Hersman said. The assumptions used to certify the battery must be reconsidered., Because of the battery issue, the 50 Dreamliners in service around world have been grounded since mid-January, causing a major headache for Boeing., Reuters adds:, Hersman said a review is needed of the 'special conditions' under which aviation regulators approved Boeing's use of this particular battery technology on the 787, a decision that has lately come under close scrutiny., The NTSB plans to issue an interim factual report in 30 days, though the decision on returning the plane to regular flight rests with the Federal Aviation Administration.
There were 366,000 first-time clams for unemployment insurance last week, down just 5,000 from the week before, the Employment and Training Administration reports., Of note: that number from the previous week 371,000 is an upward revision. A week ago, the agency estimated there had been 368,000 claims over that period., Basically, the pace changed little last week. As Bloomberg News says:, Claims, after see-sawing in prior weeks as the government had trouble adjusting the data for seasonal swings, are settling at a level that signals there is little change in the pace of firings from last year., Also this morning, the Bureau of Labor Statistics said productivity at U.S. businesses fell at a 2 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of 2012. While output went up 0.1 percent, the number of hours worked rose by 2.2 percent. So, Americans worked longer but output did not go up significantly. According to The Associated Press, much of the decline can be attributed to cutbacks at defense contractors.
The Kansas City Royals professional baseball team is among more than 500 groups and individuals listed by the NRA as anti-gun., The Kansas City Royals professional baseball team is among more than 500 groups and individuals listed by the NRA as anti-gun., What do the Kansas City Royals, C. Everett Koop, Jack Nicholson and the United Methodist Church all have in common?, Turns out the Major League Baseball team, the former surgeon general, the actor and the denomination's general board and church society are all enemies of firearms, and as such have made it onto the National Rifle Association's list of National Organizations With Anti-Gun Policies., Containing a total of 506 names, the list is dated Sept. 27, 2012, and is broken down by category: 141 groups, from AARP to the YWCA; 237 celebrities (Krista Allen to Moon Zappa); 27 national figures (mainly doctors and clergy members); 37 columnists and cartoonists; 41 corporations and 23 media organizations., The celebrities include Matt Damon (who wielded all sorts of guns in the Bourne movies), Carrie Fisher (who used a laser blaster in Star Wars) and Leonard Nimoy (who, with his Star Trek Vulcan nerve pinch, presumably had little need for a gun)., The corporations have lent their corporate support to gun control initiatives or taken [a] position supporting gun control, according to the website. Among them: Ben &amp; Jerry's ice cream, Levi Strauss and Mallinckrodt Inc., which is listed as making clothing starch., The media list includes The New York Times, The Washington Post, ABC, CBS and NBC but not Fox or NPR (at least not yet)., S.V. Dte is the congressional editor on NPR's Washington Desk.
Harlan County Lake, the Republican River's main reservoir in Nebraska, dropped 10 feet during the summer drought and hasn't recovered., Harlan County Lake, the Republican River's main reservoir in Nebraska, dropped 10 feet during the summer drought and hasn't recovered., Epic water battles are the stuff of history and legend, especially in the West. And as a severe drought drags on in the Midwest, a water war is being waged over a river that irrigates agriculture in Colorado, Nebraska and Kansas., It's that last border crossing where this water war is under way. Kansas has gone to the Supreme Court to argue that Nebraska uses too much water from the Republican River, and that there's not enough left for Kansas farmers., In Clifton, Kan., on the short end of the river, farmer Mark Taddiken is worried about having a short supply of water. He wears heavy canvas overalls on a cold, gray morning as he stands in his field with black cattle chewing yellow cornstalks. He's measuring the charge of the electric fence that keeps the cattle from roaming away., Like the nearby Republican River, the fence isn't worth much if there's no current., Three-quarters of Taddiken's farmland in north-central Kansas is irrigated with center pivots tall sprinkler systems that irrigate in circles in fields of corn and soybeans. If the river stays low, like it is now, Kansas law limits Taddiken to a third of his normal irrigation plan, limiting what he can grow. He estimates he could lose $500 per acre from reduced yields., We're standing out here under this pivot right now that covers 120 acres, he says. That restriction on that one well alone would be around $60,000., With irrigation severely restricted due to drought, Kansas farmer Mark Taddiken is worried about significant losses from reduced crop yields., With irrigation severely restricted due to drought, Kansas farmer Mark Taddiken is worried about significant losses from reduced crop yields., Draconian Or Fair?, Multiply Taddiken's loss up and down the river and you can see just how important water is here. Irrigated fields raise more valuable crops. Local businesses sell more seed and fertilizer. The price of land goes up. Take water away, and that's all reversed., Kansas officials say farmers upstream in Nebraska are pumping too much river water, leaving less for farmers like Taddiken., David Aiken studies water policy at the University of Nebraska, Lincoln. He says Nebraska did indeed use more than its share of water during a period of drought in the mid-2000s., In the past, Kansas has not gotten the water that it was entitled to in those dry years, Aiken says. and that's one of the reasons that Kansas and Nebraska are back in court., The question for the Supreme Court is how to keep thirsty Nebraska farmers in check. Kansas wants the court to order Nebraska to ban irrigation on thousands of acres of farmland., While that may sound reasonable on the Kansas side of the border, in Nebraska it's viewed as draconian., Jasper Fanning, manager of the Upper Republican Natural Resources District in southwestern Nebraska, says that plan, which he calls a just shut it down approach, doesn't make sense., That's the easiest solution to implement, but it's not the wisest solution or the best solution for us to implement, Fanning says., Driest Year On Record, Fanning says Nebraska will make sure Kansas gets its share of Republican River water. Farmers in his area plan to adopt new irrigation limits. They've also built a $12 million pipeline that they say will add water to the river from an underground aquifer., Following the state's driest year on record, Nebraska water expert David Aiken wonders if those changes will be enough., I guess this year will be the test to see whether those plans are going to be enough to keep us legal or not, Aiken says., But Nebraska is already behind. Harlan County Lake, the state's main reservoir, dropped 10 feet over the summer and hasn't recovered., The Supreme Court appointed a special master to review the states' argument in this water war and is awaiting that report. Whatever the decision, it appears to be the continuing drought that's pushing it forward., Grant Gerlock reports for Harvest Public Media, a public radio reporting project that focuses on agriculture and food production issues.
Update at 2:25 p.m. ET. It's Official:, Sally Jewell, president and CEO of REI, who is in line to be the next secretary of interior., Sally Jewell, president and CEO of REI, who is in line to be the next secretary of interior., Praising Sally Jewell as an executive who turned outdoors equipment retailer REI into one of the nation's most successful and environmentally conscious companies, President Obama just said he is nominating her to be his next interior secretary., Noting that Jewell, who in a previous job worked as an engineer for Mobil, has also climbed mountains in Antarctica, the president joked about that being just not something I think of doing., Our original post:, Sally Jewell, CEO of the outdoors equipment retailer REI, is President Obama's choice to be the next secretary of interior, according to reports from The Associated Press and other news outlets., She would succeed Secretary Ken Salazar, who announced last month that he would be departing., Jewell, AP writes, joined REI in 2000. Before that she worked in commercial banking and as an engineer for Mobil Oil Corp., The president is expected to make the news official Wednesday afternoon at the White House., Jewell has been to the White House before, at an event about the America's Great Outdoors initiative and at a discussion of innovative corporate approaches to health care., In other news related to the Obama cabinet's comings and goings, the Council on Foreign Relations says that departing Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner is joining the organization as a senior fellow., The president has nominated his chief of staff, Jacob Jack Lew, to succeed Geithner at Treasury.
Raul Rivero fills up in Miami. Having less take-home pay at the same time gas prices are rising could dampen consumer spending, economists say., Raul Rivero fills up in Miami. Having less take-home pay at the same time gas prices are rising could dampen consumer spending, economists say., Business leaders involved in homebuilding, oil drilling or automaking are happy about the way 2013 has kicked off. Lower- and middle-income consumers, on the other hand, are feeling like the year has kicked them in the head., February 6, 2013, Consumers have not rebounded with the arrival of the new year, says Ed Farrell, director of consumer insight at the Consumer Reports National Research Center. Middle-income Americans were particularly hard hit this month and appear to be losing ground., Why, at a time when so many economic indicators are looking up, do so many consumers feel let down?, A Spike At The Pump, A big reason is the sharp rise in gasoline prices, with regular jumping 18 cents to $3.54 just since last week, according to the U.S. Energy Information Administration., That was the biggest one-week jump in nearly two years, even though gasoline consumption has been falling as Americans shift to more fuel-efficient cars., Some experts say gas prices may fall back later this year because much of the price hike is tied to one-time events. For example, last fall's Superstorm Sandy had a lingering effect by disrupting gasoline supplies, causing shortages., Fires, too, have caused some disruptions at refineries. And now, as spring approaches, refineries face more interruptions as they switch from winter to summer fuel blends. Over the longer term, new pipeline capacity should open up and help gasoline prices recede through 2014, the EIA predicts., But for now, with turmoil continuing in the Middle East and economic activity picking up again in Asia, oil prices may stay fairly high. AAA, the auto club, estimates that gas prices will keep rising into the spring, up to the $3.60-$3.80 range., Carpooling In Ohio, Those higher prices are changing behaviors for customers of Mahmoud Mike Kassem, owner of a gas station in Struthers, Ohio. Reached by phone, he said that in his station's working-class area, the price increases are hurting people a lot, so they are reducing trips to the gas station. I hear people saying it all the time they tell me they are cutting down on driving; they're combining their trips, he said., Source: U.S. Energy Information Administration, Credit: Matt Stiles / NPR, And they are carpooling. The guys who work in Cleveland they'll drive three in one car, he said., Tim Quinlan, an economist at Wells Fargo, said wealthier people who own stock are doing fairly well this year because of the run-up in share prices, which are now back to pre-recession levels., Financial assets have come back, Quinlan said. But how much are low-income people participating in that? They have not experienced the wealth effect., Smaller Paychecks, At the same time, workers are getting more money taken out of their paychecks, thanks to this year's expiration of a payroll-tax holiday. In 2011 and 2012, Congress lowered the taxes people pay into Social Security; the goal was to give workers more cash to help drive economic growth. But that holiday is now over. For someone making $50,000 a year, the change means a take-home pay cut of about $20 a week., When Congress was considering whether to extend that and other expiring tax breaks back in December, the focus was on tax rates for wealthier people, but what most people weren't recognizing was how this payroll-tax increase would affect lower-income families, Quinlan said., Having less take-home pay at the same time gasoline prices are rising could dampen consumer spending, he predicts. That combination will start to wear away at consumer confidence, he said., So even though inflation is tame overall, workers are getting squeezed as they see more of their earnings going toward taxes and gasoline., 'Losing Ground', Consumer sentiment has dropped, according to the Consumer Reports Index for February, which fell to 48.9 from 51.2 a month ago. The most pessimistic consumers were those living in households earning less than $50,000., Farrell, of Consumer Reports, said a surge in hiring could improve the outlook for consumers, and the latest jobs data involving construction, energy, health care and manufacturing offered reason for hope., But for now, lower- and middle-income families appear to be losing ground, he said. It's hard to imagine a scenario that will create significant improvements in confidence until consumers feel there has been a substantial upturn led by employment.
1 of 5, Puerto Rico's population is declining. Faced with a deteriorating economy, increased poverty and a swelling crime rate, many citizens are fleeing the island for the U.S. mainland. In a four-part series, Morning Edition explores this phenomenon, and how Puerto Rico's troubles are affecting its people and other Americans in unexpected ways., Edward Bonet's mom no longer tries to convince him to join her in Florida. Unlike his family, the 23-year-old from Puerto Rico refuses to leave the island and its shattered economy., Genoveva Veva Camacho raised her family in Puerto Rico, and still lives in the town of Cabo Rojo with her grandson, Edward. Her daughters and granddaughter moved to Florida in search of a better life., Genoveva Veva Camacho raised her family in Puerto Rico, and still lives in the town of Cabo Rojo with her grandson, Edward. Her daughters and granddaughter moved to Florida in search of a better life., With Puerto Rico's unemployment rate at 14 percent, many former residents like Edward's mom, Arlene Bonet, have left the island's economic and social troubles for better opportunities on the U.S. mainland., What kind of life can I give my grandchildren in the future if Puerto Rico, instead of going up, is going down? says Arlene, who left after her real estate business died., On the island, Edward works as a scuba instructor, trying to make a living for himself. Like many other young Puerto Ricans, he started college but couldn't afford to finish., And though he briefly lived in Florida as a kid with his mom, Edward says he doesn't want to go back because it seems foreign. Puerto Rico may be a U.S. territory, but the move would feel like going to a new country as an immigrant, he says., In the U.S., at school we had to sing the national 'Star-Spangled Banner' every morning, he recalls. And here, most schools don't do that at all., A Love For The Island , One member of his ever-shrinking family still on the island is his grandmother, Genoveva Camacho, 74. He lives with her near the city of Cabo Rojo., My grandma, oh, she's great, Edward says when describing her. She parties more than I do., On a warm, breezy night, he sits with her on their patio listening to the chirps of coquis, or small frogs a symbol of Puerto Rico., Camacho is full of pride. She says she loves her island and used to go dancing with friends about every night. But today, she worries about escalating crime and paying her bills., Her daughter, Arlene, urges Camacho to join her in Florida, but she insists she won't leave until she gets older. Then save a room for me, Camacho tells her daughter when they speak on the phone., As she talks about her daughter, Camacho chokes up until Edward dances with her under the porch light., Puerto Rico's 'Informal Economy', The failing economy may not be enough to keep Edward and his grandmother off the island, but it's a predicament that economists mull over time and again., Rosario Rivera, an economics professor at the University of Puerto Rico, uses the phrase informal economy to diagnose some of the challenges facing the island., At the Rio Piedras market in San Juan, Rivera picks up a juicy, sweet fruit for 25 cents, from a man with a shopping cart., 1 of 5, That orange ... goes to the informal economy, Rivera explains., Because those tax-free purchases are repeated so often, Rivera says the government is missing the chance to tax billions of dollars of income each year. Like many Caribbean islands, Puerto Rico has little industry of its own and when times are bad, they struggle even more than other places to create jobs., There is a problem deep inside the economic structure, that you cannot create jobs, Rivera explains. You cannot create productive activity, so you just have to rely on economic activity from abroad., Around the market, men and women sell ice cream, discounted jewelry, perfumes and purses yet most of the goods are imported and not made by anyone on the island. After a six-year recession, Puerto Rico is buried in debt., Fiscally Similar To Greece, They have compared us to Greece a lot of times, Rivera says. Especially since Greece had a lot of debt, and they had to take these austerity measures. Even if we are part of the United States, we have a lot of problems that resemble those countries that we look at with such disdain., Puerto Rico has been through austerity and made tough decisions: It's cut government jobs, privatized a couple of highways, and is in the process of privatizing the international airport., But unlike the case of Greece, the economic mess is on America's hands., For U.S. citizens on the mainland who have a 401(k) account or pension for retirement, it's possible that they have money invested in Puerto Rican bonds, which are now no longer worth much. So citizens in the states could feel the pain if Puerto Rico's economy collapses., At the moment, though, Puerto Ricans left on the island are bearing the brunt of the economy, where fewer services and resources are available to people than before. With many educated people leaving the island, Rivera admits she's thought of moving to the mainland but she won't do it., If you had asked me a few years ago, I would say no with capital letters I won't leave the island. I'm here for the long haul, Rivera says. And I am here for the long haul. But it gets tiresome.
Throwback Brewery co-owner Nicole Carrier and assistant brewer Chris Naro pour beer for customers at their North Hampton, N.H., taproom., Throwback Brewery co-owner Nicole Carrier and assistant brewer Chris Naro pour beer for customers at their North Hampton, N.H., taproom., As beer drinkers demand increasingly obscure beers with ingredients like jalapenos or rhubarb, smaller and smaller breweries are stepping up to the plate. New Hampshire is one state helping these brewery startups get off the ground, with new laws that make it easier for small-scale breweries to obtain licenses and distribute their craft beers., Among those benefiting: Nicole Carrier and her partner, Annette Lee, of North Hampton, N.H. A year and half ago, they were just enthusiastic home brewers. Now, they spend much of their time rinsing equipment and mixing ingredients at their brewery, Throwback. As in, a throwback to the days when communities were smaller, and all food was local food., Carrier still works for IBM, while Lee left her job as an engineer to start the brewery. With two full-time employees, Carrier and Lee produce 360 gallons of beer a week. That's about what bigger craft breweries throw away., Annette is an engineer by her background, and we call it a 'Frankenbrewery' because we've found different pieces and she sort of engineered them together, Carrier says., About 100 of these so-called nanobreweries have sprouted up across the country. But in many places, starting one can involve a lot of red tape, thanks in part to Prohibition-era liquor laws. New Hampshire is the first state to try to change that., Despite pushback from big beverage manufacturers like Anheuser-Busch, the state has begun lowering the barrier to entry for people like Carrier and Lee. Today, seven nanobreweries are open in New Hampshire., These tiny breweries are proliferating, but they may be hard to sustain., The thing about nanobreweries that's always a challenge is they run out of products, says Tom Brock Jr., who buys beer for an upscale national grocery franchise and stocks Throwback at his New Hampshire stores. He finds small breweries unreliable and worries the novelty that makes them trendy may ultimately make them unsustainable., A lot of folks will look at nanobreweries, and they're like, 'Well, I had all their lineup, and I'm going to go on to something new,' Brock says., If they're going stick around, he says, good nanobreweries may not stay nano for long., And it's true that Carrier and Lee at Throwback will be moving to a bigger facility soon. But selling as much beer as possible to as many people as possible? That's just not their style. Carrier and Lee buy most of their ingredients within a 200-mile radius of coastal New Hampshire, and they want to limit their sales to within that radius, too., So if a lot of people around here are that thirsty, we'll get past a nanobrewery, but no, you won't find us in California, or even New York, Carrier says., Throwback Brewery is in a warehouse park, far from any downtown. That doesn't stop five or six people from coming in to try a Chipotle Porter or Fennel Flower Stout on a Tuesday evening. It is really neat to be able to support the local farmers and keep business in New Hampshire, or local, within a couple states here, says customer John Straw, who buys a glass of beer and a jug to go every week., Carrier says that while the locavore mission is probably good for business, she hopes the beer will speak for itself., And next on the docket for Carrier and Lee? Opening a Beer and Breakfast on their farm across the street., Emily Corwin is a reporter for StateImpact New Hampshire. StateImpact is a collaboration between NPR and member stations examining the effect of state policy on people's lives.
In a lawsuit, the Justice Department alleges Standard and Poor's misled investors with fraudulent credit ratings. The agency could seek more than $5 billion in damages., In a lawsuit, the Justice Department alleges Standard and Poor's misled investors with fraudulent credit ratings. The agency could seek more than $5 billion in damages., The Justice Department said Tuesday it could seek more than $5 billion in damages from Standard &amp; Poor's, the nation's biggest credit ratings company, a day after it sued the company, alleging that S&P; defrauded investors by giving triple-A ratings to risky subprime mortgage investments., The ratings business got started a century ago, when John Moody set up a company to rate railroad bonds for investors. Over the years, Moody's, S&P; and Fitch, their smaller rival, expanded into other kinds of securities such as corporate and municipal bonds., &ldquo; Rating agencies do still have a business, do still have a foothold ... The goal is to eat away at that over time., - Josh Rosner, Graham Fisher and Co., Josh Rosner of the consulting firm Graham Fisher and Co. says the ratings companies owed part of their growth to the government. He says regulators such as the Securities and Exchange Commission required anyone selling a security to first get a rating from a designated ratings company. The problem was that the SEC was particular about which companies got designated to do the ratings., Until you were designated as a rating agency, it would be very difficult to demonstrate that you have been a rating agency, Rosner says. So there was this circular logic embedded in the process of approving new entrants., As a result, the ratings business became a kind of closed shop, an oligopoly dominated by a few big players. For years, the ratings companies made money by writing up reports and selling them to investors., Economist Lawrence White of NYU's Stern School of Business says he believes the invention of photocopying machines changed that. Suddenly, ratings companies had to worry that investors could share illegal copies of the research., The rating firms were afraid that the [copy] machine would do to the rating business what the Internet would do to the recorded music business three decades later destroy the business model, White says., So the ratings companies made a fundamental change: Instead of charging investors for their research, they began charging the companies that issued the securities they were rating. It meant that the ratings companies were dependent on big Wall Street firms for revenue., So a major investment bank had a much more potent threat, White says., The threat: If you don't give me a better rating, I'm going to take my business elsewhere., That became a big problem during the housing boom. U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder said Tuesday the ratings companies were so dependent on Wall Street money that they ignored warning signs about the mortgage meltdown., Put simply, this alleged conflict is egregious and it goes to the very heart of the recent financial crisis, Holder said., In the years since the housing bust, Congress has tried to reform the ratings business. The Dodd-Frank financial reform bill seeks to encourage competition in the ratings business, but Rosner says the bill also seeks to lessen the role ratings companies play in the financial markets., Rating agencies do still have a business, do still have a foothold, he says. The goal is to eat away at that over time., Rosner says the reforms, however, don't go far enough. That hasn't been a problem so far because the market for mortgage-backed securities is still shut down. But if another housing boom occurs, he says, there's nothing to stop another flood of bad mortgage bonds from surging through the economy.
The Xlerator hand dryer is made almost entirely of American components and assembled in Massachusetts. But the company's owner says it's simply not cost-effective to use an American-made motor., The Xlerator hand dryer is made almost entirely of American components and assembled in Massachusetts. But the company's owner says it's simply not cost-effective to use an American-made motor., Fifteen years ago, Denis Gagnon bought a company that made a product nobody really liked: hand dryers. But he quickly managed to turn Massachusetts-based Excel Dryer into an innovator with the Xlerator a high-speed dryer that cut drying time from more than 30 seconds to less than 15., The Xlerator, assembled at a plant in East Longmeadow, is Made in USA Certified meaning at least 75 percent of the product is made of U.S. content. The foundries that cast most of its metal components are American, and the control boards are assembled locally. Excel polishes and electroplates the dryer covers in-house, and, in teams of four, builds the components into a working dryer., Today, Excel Dryer has 12 times the sales revenue it had in its pre-Xlerator days. It's kept 38 manufacturing jobs in the U.S. through some creative research and development, including a shop of retired MIT scientists who have invented things like an emergency flashlight, an automated shower and even a putter with an enlarged sweet spot., So why is the motor inside the Xlerator part of that remaining 25 percent not made in the U.S.? Why does it come from a company in Hong Kong?, Bill, Nancy and Denis Gagnon (from left), who turned Excel Dryer into a globally competitive business. Denis Gagnon says he will never relocate production offshore., Bill, Nancy and Denis Gagnon (from left), who turned Excel Dryer into a globally competitive business. Denis Gagnon says he will never relocate production offshore., What we need to do to be cost effective is to source a motor that's used in more than one industry, and then tailor-make a couple adjustments to make it fit our product, Gagnon tells All Things Considered host Robert Siegel. That's the only way we can cost effectively do it., Johnson Electric: American Name, Asian Company, The company that makes the Xlerator's motor, Johnson Electric, has a very American-sounding name and an office in Shelton, Conn. But it's very much an Asian company that's traded on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. And in the world of small motors, it is a big, big player., According to Johnson Electric's website, the company makes motors for kitchen appliances, hair dryers, toothbrushes, power tools, printers, DVD players, copiers and vending machines. For cars, the company makes door locks, mirrors, wipers, washers, brakes, radiator fans and fuel pumps., Gagnon employs 38 people on his factory floor. In contrast, Johnson Electric's 2012 annual report says the company's global headcount including contract employees is approximately 38,000 people., As a small business, Gagnon says his best deal was getting Johnson Electric to adapt one of its many motors to the Xlerator's specs., Tooling up a special motor for Xlerator, when we didn't know if we even had a product, was kinda out of the question at the time, Gagnon says. We settled in on a high-volume motor that they could make some adaptations to. And frankly, that turned out to be good decision., East Asia, A Small-Motor Powerhouse, Johnson Electric is one of two major players in nonindustrial motors, along with a Japan-based company, says Alex Chausovsky, who follows motors for the market intelligence firm IHS., Almost all the small motors in virtually every motor-powered consumer product come from the region, he says from the vibration motors in cellphones to hair dryers and microwaves., Johnson Electric and its major competitor, Japan's Mabuchi, can keep their products inexpensive in large part because of economies of scale. Both companies, Chausovsky says, make in excess of a million motors per day., Low labor costs in Asia are also a critical factor, Chausovsky says, although they're not as low as they were five or 10 years ago. And as those costs have grown particularly in China this type of manufacturing has begun to spread to places like Mexico, Poland and the Czech Republic., But the fact that many years ago labor costs were significantly lower allowed them to establish those economies of scale, he says meaning it still makes sense for the bulk of small-motor manufacturing to continue in Asia, at least for now., Back at Excel Dryer, Gagnon says whatever greater savings his company might enjoy by manufacturing the entire Xlerator overseas, it's not a choice he's willing to make., [It will] never happen on my watch. I've expanded this facility twice; I have no intention of ever relocating the manufacturing offshore, he says. We'll be smart enough to make it here in the United States.
While the economy will benefit from continued improvement in underlying conditions, the federal government's push to tighten its spending will slow overall growth in 2013, the Congressional Budget Office projects., In an updated Budget and Economic Outlook reported released Tuesday afternoon, the agency forecasts:, &mdash; 1.4 percent growth in gross domestic product this year, vs. 2.3 percent in 2012., &mdash; 2.6 percent growth in 2014., &mdash; 4.1 percent growth in 2015., Meanwhile, the unemployment rate won't come down much:, &mdash; It's expected to average 7.9 percent this year, vs. 8.1 percent in 2012., &mdash; 7.8 percent in 2013., &mdash; 7.1 percent in 2015., As we reported earlier, the CBO's projections and the threat deep spending cuts could pose to the economy are among the reasons President Obama today urged Congress to pass a smaller package of spending reductions and tax changes that would take effect before the automatic sequestration takes effect on March 1.
It happens all the time: The government announces some giant settlement with a company that's been accused of doing something wrong. The company agrees to pay some massive fine. Then, in the fine print, there's something along the lines of: The company neither admits nor denies any wrongdoing., Recently, though, some powerful people have been pushing back, rejecting deals that include this kind of fine print., Jed Rakoff, a federal judge, refused to approve a big settlement between the SEC and Citigroup precisely because it included that boilerplate about neither admitting nor denying guilt., In his decision (PDF), Judge Rakoff wrote that he couldn't approve a settlement when no one had proved or admitted that Citi did anything wrong. What's more, Rakoff aruged, the whole neither-admit-nor-deny thing is contrary to the public interest:, ...in any case like this that touches on the transparency of financial markets whose gyrations have so depressed our economy and debilitated our lives there is an overriding public interest in knowing the truth., Rakoff's decision may be overturned, but last month the SEC restricted companies' ability to refuse to admit wrongdoing, at least in certain cases., And this week's government lawsuit against Standard &amp; Poor's was filed in part because S&P; refused to admit wrongdoing, according to the NYT. The government says S&P; knowingly inflated the ratings of mortgage-backed bonds; the company says the accusations are false., No surprise there: If S&P; were to admit that it knowingly inflated bond ratings, it could face a huge wave of lawsuits., If you say, 'Oh, we're guilty,' then everybody in the world who ever bought a bond that was rated could come after you, Lawrence Kaplan, a lawyer who's an expert in banking regulation, told me this morning., Going to trial and being found guilty would actually create fewer legal problems for S&amp;P.; Unlike admitting wrongdoing, losing a trial is only binding in that particular case, Kaplan said. Other would-be plaintiffs would have to try the case all over again, before a new jury, which might find in favor of the company., So if federal prosecutors really are getting serious about forcing companies to choose between admitting wrongdoing and going to trial, we're likely to see more cases go to court and fewer big settlements where companies agree to pay lots of money but don't admit they did anything wrong.
Slumping personal computer maker Dell is selling itself for $24.4 billion to its founder and a group of investors that includes Microsoft, The Associated Press writes, in the largest deal of its kind since the Great Recession dried up financing for risky maneuvers like this., The wire service adds that the complex agreement announced Tuesday will end Dell Inc.'s nearly 25-year history as a publicly traded company. Shareholders are receiving $13.65 per share for their stock. ... Founder Michael Dell will remain the company's CEO and largest shareholder., On Morning Edition, NPR's Steve Henn previewed the news and said that analysts aren't sure the deal will make the company more competitive. As Steve reported:, For Michael Dell to take the company he founded almost 30 years ago private, it will have to borrow in the neighborhood of $15 billion. That debt will be a drain on Dell's cash.
Arlene Bonet settled in Orlando, Fla., after her Puerto Rico real estate business crashed. She's now working for a Puerto Rican cultural organization in Orlando, while her son and mother still live in her hometown, Cabo Rojo, Puerto Rico., Arlene Bonet settled in Orlando, Fla., after her Puerto Rico real estate business crashed. She's now working for a Puerto Rican cultural organization in Orlando, while her son and mother still live in her hometown, Cabo Rojo, Puerto Rico., Puerto Rico's population is dropping. Faced with a deteriorating economy, increased poverty and a swelling crime rate, many citizens are fleeing the island for the U.S. mainland. In a four-part series, Morning Edition explores this phenomenon, and how Puerto Rico's troubles are affecting its people and other Americans in unexpected ways. , According to the most recent census, the 4.6 million Puerto Ricans living on the U.S. mainland now surpass those on the island of Puerto Rico. For years, they've been migrating out of the U.S. Caribbean territory many to escape the escalating crime rate and economic crisis., Today, Florida replaces New York as the primary destination for Puerto Ricans coming to the U.S. In Osceola County, Fla., the population has tripled over the past two decades largely because of the migration. It's one of the nation's fastest growing areas, and about half of the population is Hispanic most of them Puerto Rican., Bringing Puerto Rico To Florida, In Kissimmee, south of Orlando, many of the signs are in Spanish, and some businesses resemble what you might find in a city like San Juan., One of those businesses is Miguel Fontanez's restaurant, Pioco's Chicken. It's a spot that was started by his father, also named Miguel., The elder Fontanez owned a chain of successful restaurants in Puerto Rico. But in 1996, he brought his family to Central Florida after his brother, a police officer, was killed., 1 of 6, It was very bad; it was very tough, Fontanez says. So [my father] just wanted to move somewhere fresh and start something different. And my grandmother at that time was living already here. So the first place that came to mind was Florida., Many of his customers, he says, are still newcomers from the island., Just last week, I had a big group, a family that just moved from Puerto Rico here because of the economy, because it's very bad, Fontanez says. They're more in the truck business, and over here it's expanding more than over there., Other businesses larger endeavors are also migrating from the island., A number of Puerto Rican colleges and universities have opened campuses in Central Florida, offering bilingual education to the area's fast-growing Hispanic population., Mech Tech Institute, for example, is a technical school that launched its first U.S. campus last year in Orlando at a defunct Saturn dealership. The institute offers training in everything from heating and air-conditioning repair to diesel machines., A Long History With Florida, The connection between Florida and Puerto Rico stretches back decades. But many say the Big Bang the event that created the huge wave of Puerto Rican migration came on a specific date: Oct. 1, 1971, the day Walt Disney World opened its doors., Disney World, and the theme parks that came after it, created thousands of jobs in an area that had been largely rural. Opportunities were especially ripe for bilingual speakers like John Quinones, a Puerto Rican who's now a commissioner in Osceola County., I used Spanish a lot, Quinones says. A lot of the [people from] Latin American countries that would come to visit the parks that would certainly cater to them., Quinones was 14 when his family moved to the area from Puerto Rico. He worked at Disney World's Frontierland, at the Pecos Bill cafe, to support himself while in college., The opening of Disney World came at a critical time for Puerto Rico, as the 1970s saw the beginning of an economic slowdown on the island that continues to this day., But Jorge Duany, a professor of anthropology at Miami's Florida International University, says the financial troubles arrived after decades of prosperity on the island an era that greatly expanded the middle class., And there was substantial economic growth, Duany says. The educational system expanded. So there was actually a large group of people who were then capable of investing, migrating or at least buying land in Florida so they or their kids could use it later on., A New Home, Some of the Puerto Ricans in Osceola County say they came to be with family, some to get away from rising crime. But many, like Arlene Bonet, moved to find work. Bonet came from what she describes as a beautiful area on Puerto Rico's southwest coast a town called Cabo Rojo., I used to live right on the corner by the beach. I used to go every day to the beach to see the sunsets, she recalls., She says she misses those sunsets and the mountains nearby, where she would meditate and practice yoga every Sunday. Her town is a vacation area, and for many years, she made a good living selling real estate., But then the economy and the bubble exploded all around the world, and real estate went down, mortgages went down, and business went down too, she says., Arlene Bonet (right), shown with her daughter, Didra, and her sister Genoveva (left), lives in Orlando, Fla. Bonet's daughter, who works part time and attends college part time, lives with her., Arlene Bonet (right), shown with her daughter, Didra, and her sister Genoveva (left), lives in Orlando, Fla. Bonet's daughter, who works part time and attends college part time, lives with her., In this family photo, Arlene Bonet and her younger sister Genoveva are seen with their mother, also named Genoveva, in Puerto Rico., In this family photo, Arlene Bonet and her younger sister Genoveva are seen with their mother, also named Genoveva, in Puerto Rico., Bonet says she did what she could to keep going. She laid off her four employees and went back to school to get her MBA. But then Puerto Rico went into what she calls a second, politically driven downturn., To combat a massive budget deficit, Puerto Rico's government laid off thousands of public employees. Bonet's business was dead, and she saw no signs of when it might come back., After moving to Central Florida with her daughter, Bonet says finding a job wasn't easy. But now that she has one, she's grown to love the area and has no plans to return., It's pretty much like a Caribbean island because it's sunny, it's fresh, it's beautiful, she explains. So we feel like it's home., While the move was hard on her daughter, Bonet says it was crucial both for her future and her eventual grandchildren., That's one of the reasons also I moved, Bonet says. It's not just thinking about me. What kind of life can I give my grandchildren in the future if Puerto Rico, instead of going up, is going down?
A sign for Standard &amp; Poor's rating agency stands in front of the company headquarters in New York., A sign for Standard &amp; Poor's rating agency stands in front of the company headquarters in New York., The United States and some states are planning to sue Standard &amp; Poor's Ratings Services over what they say were the faulty ratings of mortgage bonds leading up to the 2008 financial collapse., The Wall Street Journal broke the news citing people familiar with the matter, and The New York York Times is pinning its reporting on S&P;, which tells the newspaper it is expecting a lawsuit., The Wall Street Journal explains:, The likely move by U.S. officials would be the first federal enforcement action against a credit-rating firm for alleged illegal behavior related to the crisis. Several state attorneys general are expected to join the case, making it one of the highest-profile and widest-ranging enforcement crisis-era crackdowns., The expected civil charges against S&P; follow the breakdown of long-running settlement talks between the Justice Department and S&P;, the people said., Many details of the looming enforcement action couldn't be immediately determined, such as why prosecutors are zeroing in on S&P; rather than rivals Moody's Corp. and Fitch Ratings, a unit of Fimalac SA and Hearst Corp., Update at 2:52 p.m. ET. Without 'Legal Merit':, S&P; issued a statement saying a lawsuit from Justice, would be entirely without factual or legal merit., The New York Times reports that by bringing a civil suit as opposed to criminal suit, the Justice Department's burden of proof will be less, perhaps lowering the bar for a successful prosecution.
Canadian pennies. They're not going to be put into circulation anymore., Canadian pennies. They're not going to be put into circulation anymore., Canada is changing its change., The USA's northern neighbor on Monday stopped distributing pennies. Going forward, stores up there will be rounding prices to the nearest nickel (sometimes up!). It's all part of a plan, as Planet Money has reported, to save the government $11 million a year. No more spending 1.6 cents or so to make a coin worth just a ... penny., In The Wall Street Journal last month, Medallic Art Company historian D. Wayne Johnson made the case for eliminating the U.S. penny as well as the nickel and quarter to save on minting costs. NPR's Scott Simon doubts any of that will happen anytime soon because politics makes it truly tough to phase out coinage that comes with presidents' profiles. And BloombergBusinessweek has pointed out that plenty of Americans like pennies and their Honest Abe heritage. Those enthusiasts, along with industry lobbies, have rallied to support the coins when there has been movement to kill them., So it probably won't happen. But should the U.S. penny join its Canadian cousin in the home for retired coins?, Note: That's just a question, not a scientific survey of public opinion., For more news about Canadian currencies, see our earlier post: Whoa Canada! New Currency Has 'Wrong' Maple Leaf?
Wal-Mart claims that 11 percent of the produce in its stores now comes from local farms., Wal-Mart claims that 11 percent of the produce in its stores now comes from local farms., When Wal-Mart calls, Herman Farris always finds whatever the retailer wants, even if it's yucca root in the dead of winter. Farris is a produce broker in Columbia, Mo., who has been buying for Wal-Mart from auctions and farms since the company began carrying fruits and vegetables in the early 1990s., During the summer and fall, nearly everything Farris delivers is grown in Missouri. That's Wal-Mart's definition of local produce grown and sold in the same state. In winter, it's a bit tougher to source locally., In 2010, Wal-Mart pledged to double its local produce sales from 4 to 9 percent by 2015, as part of a new sustainability program and a commitment to support small businesses. While the chain has exceeded that goal it says 11 percent of its produce sold nationwide comes from local farms there's little evidence of small farmers benefiting, at least in the Midwest., Organic vegetable grower Jim Thomas, who grows organic vegetables and sells them at the Columbia farmers market, doesn't know anyone who has sold successfully to Wal-Mart., They tend to try to force people into lower prices than feasible, he says. My only concern is that they're willing to pay the price to get the quality that they get from local produce., Wal-Mart says they try to be as price competitive as possible, and that their local buyers draw up contracts with farmers a year out, laying out fixed prices for set amounts of crops. Ron McCormick, senior director of sustainable agriculture for Wal-Mart's U.S. division, says that the number of small farms supplying the company has grown since 2010. But there are challenges like keeping track of growers, uncertainty about small farms delivering during bad-weather years, and the high costs of strict food safety audits, which are required to supply Wal-Mart., There are ways to help the farmer with those costs but it's a matter of doing that 100 times over if you're working with small farmers, McCormick said., Produce broker Herman Farris, outside a Wal-Mart in Columbia, Mo., was heading to St. Louis to pick up a shipment of bananas for Wal-Mart., Produce broker Herman Farris, outside a Wal-Mart in Columbia, Mo., was heading to St. Louis to pick up a shipment of bananas for Wal-Mart., Wal-Mart claims its emphasis on local has saved customers over $1 billion while helping farmers. But Wyatt Fraas, of the Center for Rural Affairs in Lyon, Neb., would like to see those benefits and cost savings broken down., Unfortunately, there's so little definition and transparency about how that happens that we don't really know if that happens or how that happens, he said., Of the eight farms highlighted on Wal-Mart's locally grown web site, five are very large farms by the U.S. Department of Agriculture's definition, with annual sales in the millions of dollars., And then there's the question of volume. The University of Missouri Extension's Jennifer Schutter, who helps farmers sell produce to retailers, says many small farmers in Missouri simply can't grow enough., They only have produce for four months out of the year, she says. Wal-Mart wants produce consistently from the same distributor pretty much all year long., A few small operations in the Midwest have had success working with Wal-Mart, including Divine Gardens, a tomato grower in western Kansas, and Missouri Vegetable Farm, a 200-acre farm 70 miles south of St. Louis., Missouri Vegetable Farm was created in 2010 specifically to supply Wal-Mart by the Proffer family, which also owns Proffer Wholesale Produce. Proffer Produce has been a middleman for Wal-Mart since the 1990s, and delivers produce to distribution centers in 13 states. Overall, the company has sales of nearly $60 million a year., In its shipping facility, as workers in hairnets separated green peppers by quality, size and weight, food safety director Jason Landers said farms, regardless of their size, must adapt their business models to compete in the growing local foods market., If they want to continue to succeed, they have to modify their operations, he said., But LaDonna Redmond, a senior policy associate with the Institute of Agriculture and Trade Policy in Minneapolis, says it's a slippery slope., That's the question: Will it actually benefit [farmers], or will the situation turn out to be one where the benefit really is transferred to Wal-Mart? Redmond says., She adds that until Wal-Mart builds the cost of producing local food into its prices, few small farms will truly benefit from the retailer's push to source more local food., Abbie Fentress Swanson reports from Missouri for Harvest Public Media, an agriculture-reporting project involving nine NPR member stations in the Midwest. For more stories about farm and food, check out Harvest Public Media.
A sign hangs outside a house in Miami in 2010. Currently, Florida's foreclosure legal process can take a couple of years, which critics say is hurting the housing market., A sign hangs outside a house in Miami in 2010. Currently, Florida's foreclosure legal process can take a couple of years, which critics say is hurting the housing market., A decade ago, speculators in Florida were pumping up a huge housing bubble., You couldn't go wrong, Tampa real estate attorney Charlie Hounchell says. In that overheated period from 2001 to 2006, you could buy a house and make $100,000 a year later by selling it, he says., But the party ended in 2007 and the hangover persists. The state now has the highest foreclosure rate in the country, beating out Nevada for the first time in five years., Experts say the legal process in Florida is the key reason for the sluggish pace of foreclosures there., A Three-Minute Trial, The busy lobby inside the Hillsborough County courthouse in Tampa is noisy with defendants, lawyers, even crying babies. But inside a fourth-floor courtroom, it's all business as focused and streamlined as possible., I enter a final judgment of foreclosure for the total sum of $194,256.49 with a public sale date of March 11 at 10 a.m., Judge Judy Pittman Biebel says as she delivers a verdict. The entire foreclosure trial took about three minutes., Biebel is a retired judge from Panama City, Fla., who travels to Tampa to sit on the bench for a week at a time specifically to handle foreclosure cases., We work cheap, she says with a laugh, and we're paid $350 a day., The state funds these additional judges to help deal with the enormous backlog of foreclosures. One in every 32 Florida households received a notice of default, auction or repossession in 2012 more than double the national average., Florida is getting it from both ends: Foreclosures are still coming in at a high rate, and they're very slow going out. In fact, it's taking nearly 2 1/2 years to get through the judicial process., Biebel says the courts stay busy., Today was all nonjury trials, she says. Yesterday was various motions all day long. So we sit and do this all day long. , And this speedy trial over in just minutes stands in stark contrast to the foreclosure process, which typically starts years earlier., Real estate agents say the backlog of distressed homes makes it tough for the Florida housing market to recuperate. Those homes depress prices and create uncertainty in neighborhoods., Florida's 'Broke' Legal Process, Why does it take so long to get these foreclosed houses back on the market?, Analysts say the cumbersome legal process in Florida sets the state apart from other hard-hit states., But judges say they're not at fault. They say banks need to get a handle on finding promissory notes that have been shipped all over the country and on organizing their paperwork., Others, like Sharmon Lenth, blame foreclosure defense lawyers. She's the president of a small credit union that has been trying to foreclose on a house for years. She watched the proceedings from the courtroom gallery., These people, they've lived in this house over 2 1/2 years for absolutely ... for nothing, she says., Lenth doesn't want the judge to give the homeowners any more time., We worked with these folks, she says. We worked with them starting back in 2008. We combined things for them so we lowered their payments. Eight months later we worked with them again, to help them to get through some tough times. They made 14 payments on that, they defaulted on it and hired one of these attorney groups., The homeowners didn't attend the trial, but their attorney, Satyen Gandhi, was at court. Gandhi said the loan modification expired after two years, leaving his client unable to make payments again., Biebel ended up giving the borrowers more than 60 days to leave the house., Lenth was disappointed. She says the members of her credit union needed to acquire that house and have it sold., The whole process is just broke. It's just broke, she says., No Quick Solution Seen, Lenth says unscrupulous foreclosure attorneys are using delaying tactics to tie up the process. But even with the complaints about the process, it doesn't appear that it will change anytime soon., Nor should it, says Hounchell, the real estate attorney. He says the judicial review is an important protection for homeowners a protection that they don't get in most other states., But comparing one state to another is not necessarily fair, because Nevada is a nonjudicial foreclosure state, he explains. In Florida, the consumer has much more opportunity to remedy their default situation., They're going to need those opportunities, because experts say the foreclosure crisis won't end anytime soon.
Trader Frederick Reimer works on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange on Friday., Trader Frederick Reimer works on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange on Friday., Happy days are (or might be) here again: The Dow Jones industrial average closed above 14,000 Friday, marking the first time the stock market measure has broken that barrier at close since October 2007., The average closed at 14,009.79. That's up more than 149 points, or about 1.1 percent for the day. The closing comes hours after the release of a new monthly unemployment report that indicated jobs grew at a faster rate late last year than previously estimated., The primary driver is not the 157,000 new jobs (created in January), but the positive revisions to the months of November and December, Darrell Cronk, regional chief investment officer at Wells Fargo Private Bank, told MarketWatch.com., ^DJI data by YCharts, Psychologically, it's a monumental number, Daniel Morgan, senior portfolio manager at Synovus Trust, told The Wall Street Journal. It happened quicker than a lot of people thought it might, based on what's going on with the economy and the political climate.
The winding down of the war in Afghanistan and efforts to slice the budget deficit will likely mean more spending cuts for the Pentagon., The winding down of the war in Afghanistan and efforts to slice the budget deficit will likely mean more spending cuts for the Pentagon., The economy shrunk in the fourth quarter for the first time in three years and one of the critical reasons was a drop in defense spending. Apparently, contractors took precautionary steps and held onto money in case the federal government failed to avert the fiscal and tax crisis known as the fiscal cliff., But there's now a new deadline automatic budget cuts, known as sequestration, which may hit at the beginning of March., The Effect On Contractors, Kevin Graybeal sells components for electronic systems. His buyers are big defense contractors like Northrop Grumman., This past year, he saw some of his contracts drop 50 percent; others have just gone away., I see it as companies just bracing for what's going to come and doing their best to plan in such an uncertain environment, he says. You think 10 years ago people were coming up with five- or 10-year plans. And right now no one knows what to do six months from now., Or even one month from now., At the Pentagon, automatic spending cuts will start in March unless Congress comes up with a way to stop them. The military will face almost $50 billion in cuts this year alone., What Might Be Cut, That means more of Graybeal's contracts could disappear. There's more: Military pilots might be told to stop training; ship repairs might be put on hold; Pentagon civilian employees are being told to expect furloughs however, uniformed personnel are exempt., Every activity within the Department of Defense will have to be cut by the same percentage, says Todd Harrison, a defense analyst with the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments. It'll be about a 9 percent cut off of every account., So how do you cut 10 percent of a Joint Strike Fighter?, Well, you cut back instead of buying 29 of them this year, we might just buy 26 or maybe even 25. In some cases that means they have to go back and break contracts., Harrison and other analysts say those across-the-board spending cuts are likely to go into effect, but maybe for just a short time perhaps a month or so., If it only goes into effect for a month, that won't be enough time for the furloughs to kick in, Harrison says., But even if the automatic cuts don't happen or don't last long Congress is looking at slicing the budget deficit, and the Pentagon is still a big target., There's little doubt that if the two parties can agree on a formula for deficit reduction, a significant amount of the savings are going to come from the Pentagon, says Loren Thompson, a defense analyst at the Lexington Institute., And that will have an impact on defense workers in the broader economy, he says., Finding Savings, Experts predict the cuts won't be $50 billion, but maybe half of that, each year for the next decade. So where does the Pentagon find those savings?, Gordon Adams was a defense budget analyst during the Clinton administration. He says as the war in Afghanistan winds down, the Pentagon can save money on expenses like maintenance. For example, there's no rush to repair armored vehicles., How fast do we put things though the depot? How much training do we do, and how frequently, and with whom? How much are we going to lay in stocks of fuel supplies? Adams says., And with little appetite for another ground war, some analysts say there could be more cuts in the Army and Marine Corps, along with fewer armored vehicles., The new strategic focus is on Asia and the Pacific. That means there will be winners and losers in the defense industry., Harrison says aircraft systems and shipbuilding will probably fare well, but production for other military equipment might not., Other parts of the industry, though, that build ground vehicles, tanks, I think that they're likely to get hurt disproportionately, he says., Not just yet. Salesman Graybeal might be hurting, but Northrop Grumman is predicting strong profits for this year.
Gun rights advocates demonstrate at the capitol in Harrisburg, Pa., on Wednesday as vendors pulled out of the city's Eastern Sports and Outdoor Show. Vendors were upset that the organizers of the event banned the sale and display of certain types of guns., A boycott by vendors starting this weekend at one of the nation's largest hunting and fishing shows has led to the event's indefinite postponement. Pennsylvania businesses stand to lose tens of millions of dollars in revenue., Some 200 shops and groups pulled out of the Harrisburg, Pa., event after organizers banned the sale and display of certain types of guns., Rick Harro is one of the more than 1,000 exhibitors at the Eastern Sports and Outdoor Show who will be missing out on sales. For Harro, who sells Gobbler Getter turkey calls for $50 each, that's likely to add up to about $4,000 in lost revenue owing to the nine-day hunting and fishing extravaganza's postponement., This was my biggest show, and actually we were sort of counting on this to get me to my next couple shows, says Harro., Following the Sandy Hook Elementary School mass shooting, the show organizer banned the display of assault weapons at the event. Britain-based Reed Exhibitions would not comment for this story., The decision led to a boycott that started with a south central Pennsylvania gun shop. Trop Gun Shop was the first vendor to drop out of the show that draws some 250,000 visitors each year. Sales manager James Diehl says the shop's owner didn't like being told what he could sell, especially because the rifles in question are legal., Diehl says they had no idea the decision would spawn a movement., After we pulled out of the Eastern Sports and Outdoor Show, and we got hundreds upon hundreds of likes on our Facebook page and the industry backed us up by pulling out of the show, subsequently, the business has been brisk, says Diehl., &ldquo; I cried. I literally cried. I was devastated. , - Sharon Altland of the Hershey Harrisburg Regional Visitors Bureau, Diehl says while he feels bad for smaller non-gun-related vendors who may be losing money, he thinks the decision to boycott the show has increased business at the shop., The semi-automatic AR-15 rifle has been Diehl's hottest seller. It's so in demand there's only one in the shop, and it's spoken for. Diehl says it's popular not only because it was banned from the show but because many fear it will be outlawed if Congress approves new gun control measures., Drivers on the interstate outside Harrisburg can still see a billboard advertising the Eastern Sports and Outdoor Show. And while the advertising is already paid for, the Hershey Harrisburg Regional Visitors Bureau estimates some $44 million in direct spending will be lost., I cried. I literally cried. I was devastated, says Sharon Altland, the visitors bureau's director of sales., She says everyone from shuttle bus drivers to Girl Scouts who fundraise during the show could be affected. And she says some businesses may even have to close., Quite honestly, I don't know how they're going to survive. There's a lot of vendors that participate in this show that this is their No. 1 show. They only do one show a year, says Atland., The boycott and show postponement most likely won't change any minds about gun control, but its impact will be felt in real dollars across a region where hunting and fishing are a way of life.
A new home under construction in Pepper Pike, Ohio. This spring's jobs data could look much brighter if housing heats up., A new home under construction in Pepper Pike, Ohio. This spring's jobs data could look much brighter if housing heats up., Here in the depths of winter, U.S. economic numbers aren't looking so hot. This week, new reports showed growth started to freeze up last fall, and the unemployment rate rose a bit in January, to 7.9 percent., But most economists say you shouldn't let those cold facts fool you: This spring's data could look much brighter if the housing market continues to heat up., February 1, 2013, A stronger real estate sector typically means increased hiring as companies add carpenters, bricklayers, real estate agents, loan processors, carpet installers, landscapers, furniture makers, painters, appliance manufacturers and so many more., The all-important housing market has come back to life, says Bernard Baumohl, chief economist with The Economic Outlook Group, in Princeton, N.J. New and existing home sales, starts and permits, along with homebuilder confidence have all rebounded., Before this potential wave of spring hiring begins, workers first have to slog through the winter. In January, the economy added 157,000 jobs, the Labor Department said Friday. That was in line with what most economists had predicted for the monthly tally., Housing Finds Its Footing, But job gains are poised to pick up as the housing sector continues to find its footing. The construction sector added 28,000 jobs last month. Since reaching a low in January 2011, construction employment has grown by 296,000, with one-third of the gain occurring in the last 4 months, the Bureau of Labor Statistics said Friday., Spending on construction rebounded last year with a gain of 9.2 percent, after falling in 2011, the Commerce Department said Friday. Spending on residential projects saw its ninth straight monthly increase in December., And new data from the Federal Reserve show household real estate wealth increased by more than $1 trillion during the first three quarters of 2012. The latest reading of the closely watched S&P;/Case-Shiller Home Price Index shows an upward pricing trend is continuing into this year, with homes now selling for about 5 percent more than a year ago., Rising prices reflect the surge in demand from would-be buyers., Builders are not putting up homes fast enough to meet underlying demand, Patrick Newport, U.S. economist with IHS Global Insight, wrote in a housing-market assessment., Pent-Up Demand?, The chief source of that demand is simply the passage of time. Real estate hasn't been moving much for more than six years, so millions of people have had time to grow older, find partners, have babies, land new jobs, retire and so on. Now they are ready to move up to a bigger home or downsize to a condo., The National Association of Home Builders, a trade group, says government data show each home start supports about three new jobs, including workers in industries such as lumber, concrete, lighting fixtures, lending and so on., Traditionally, economic recoveries gain momentum only after the housing market bounces back and revs up that job-creating machinery. From 1980 to 2007, the housing industry accounted for roughly 5 percent of total GDP, but since 2008, the recovery has been weak because housing has been making less than half its normal contribution to total growth., The Bipartisan Policy Center, a think tank in Washington, said that if the housing sector were to rebound to its historical average of growth, the economy would generate 2.9 million direct jobs for architects, roofers, electricians, real estate agents and others., Setting The Stage For Recovery, But will it really happen this spring?, A lot of economists say yes. They note that during the worst of the recession, many people moved in with relatives or rented. But since October 2009, when unemployment peaked at 10 percent, employers have created 5.2 million jobs, making it possible for many more people to buy homes., And even though the jobless rate still remains high, labor analysts say mass cutbacks have ended, bringing more security to more workers. Layoffs in January were down 24 percent compared with last year, according to Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas, an employment consulting firm., Meanwhile, rents have risen sharply since 2009. High rents, combined with low mortgage interest rates, are making home ownership an affordable choice., When it comes to job creation, the most promising news is related to the housing market, consulting firm CEO John Challenger says. That market, with its rising prices, will make it possible for more people to sell their homes without taking a loss., That frees them to relocate to areas where jobs are going unfilled due to lack of labor supply. This could further accelerate the recovery by getting longtime job seekers back onto payrolls, Challenger said., Some Economists Remain Cautious , Still, even the optimists know not to get too excited about a recovery that has had so many fits and starts. John Engler, president of the Business Roundtable, an association for chief executives, met Thursday with journalists to hash over news that the gross domestic product, a measure of total growth, suddenly contracted in late 2012., Most economists chalked up the unexpected reversal to various one-time events, ranging from military cutbacks to Superstorm Sandy to congressional drama. So the economic reality may be stronger than the initial GDP data., Engler said he wants to be optimistic, especially knowing that when housing perks up, the spillover effect on the economy is huge., But he added that even with so many indicators pointing to a strong spring for housing, a big question remains: Is the confidence there to go out and buy a home?
More and more gluten-free beers are entering the marketplace. We asked a librarian with celiac disease for her list of favorites., More and more gluten-free beers are entering the marketplace. We asked a librarian with celiac disease for her list of favorites., Anyone who gives up gluten, either by choice or medical necessity, will inevitably feel a twinge of regret bidding adieu to bread, pasta or pastries. But for some, the greatest hardship may be saying no to beer especially at times like Super Bowl Sunday, when having a cold one in hand is part of many people's game day tradition., So it's no small thing that a growing number of brewers are offering gluten-free beers that are both tasty and satisfying., They're joining other food and beverage producers who've discovered that gluten-free is now a $4.2 billion market, as the ranks of people with celiac disease and gluten sensitivity grow., While many gluten-free beer drinkers complain of the lack of quality or variety, the choices have grown steadily. Consider that in 2007, when the Great American Beer Festival officially added a gluten-free category to its competition, only eight beers were entered. At last year's festival, the category drew 20 entries., When I tell Abbey Potter, a librarian at the Library of Congress who was diagnosed with celiac disease five years ago, that several brewers are now focused only on making good beer without gluten, her answer is immediate: God bless them., Potter learned to appreciate craft beer during her college years in Kalamazoo, Mich. She eventually took up home brewing, buying equipment that later sat unused. For her, the treat of drinking Kalamazoo-made Bell's beers in Washington, D.C., was short-lived; she was diagnosed with celiac not long after Bell's hit local shelves., So I invited Abbey to join me in a tasting of gluten-free beers. I was a bit dubious of the quality we'd find, knowing that malted wheat or barley, which are responsible for the gluten in most beers, also add a lot of flavor and heft. But Abbey had recently said she'd found options that taste like real beer, and I had tracked down a couple I wanted to try, as well., God bless them, Abbey Potter says of craft brewers who are making gluten-free beer. Potter was diagnosed with celiac disease several years ago., God bless them, Abbey Potter says of craft brewers who are making gluten-free beer. Potter was diagnosed with celiac disease several years ago., Most brewers use one of two strategies for making beer without gluten. Some avoid cereals like wheat, barley and rye, substituting sorghum, rice or fruit. Others brew with barley and then extract gluten from the beer. Drinkers who are highly sensitive to gluten often avoid these beers. But the process removes enough of the protein to be deemed gluten-free according to international standards. And Abbey says she hasn't had a problem with them., They're trying to give you the real experience, she says. Because that's what you miss the most when you have to drink gluten-free beer: feeling like you're having a beer., Some of the following selections are widely available; some are more limited, owing to seasonal releases or distribution deals., New Planet Pale Ale (5 percent alcohol by volume), This beer, from a brewery whose owner is gluten-intolerant, replaces malted grains with sorghum and brown rice extract. Like a traditional pale ale, it has a floral bitterness that brings craft beer to mind., It has that little bitterness to it, which is nice, Abbey says. Because sorghum can be kind of sweet., Dogfish Head Tweason'Ale (6 percent ABV), Featuring strawberries and sorghum along with hops, this crisp ale is a nod to the sweet and sour flavors of a Belgian lambic. The fruit adds a little complexity without taking over it smells like beer, Abbey says., It would definitely work for me in a ballpark, picnic situation and I would not feel like a weird outcast, she says. I think they have a good recipe., Still, she notes, It's not as carbonated as 'real beer.' , Omission Pale Ale (5.8 percent ABV) , Omission comes from Craft Brew Alliance, which also produces Widmer Brothers and other malted beers. To reduce the gluten content, the brewer uses low-protein barley and adds an enzyme called Brewers Clarex, which breaks down gluten. The end product isn't 100 percent gluten-free, though, and Abbey could feel the effects of it after drinking it., But she enjoyed the flavor enough to keep at it, anyway., That tastes more like beer to me, Potter says. It tastes malty. Which is hard when you're making beer without gluten., Green's 'Quest' Tripel Blonde Ale (8.5 percent ABV), This Belgian beer pours with a rich, full head. Like some of our other selections, hops and a relatively high alcohol content help it avoid the sweet and watery qualities of other gluten-free beers., This has that refreshingness you drink it, it makes you go, 'Aah,' Abbey says., Made with millet, buckwheat and rice, Quest has a full body that's made more complex by Belgian yeast., You can see there's something in there, Abbey says. It looks like a craft beer; it's not clear. It has a nice bitterness to it, too ... it's like an orange coriander beer., Indeed, gluten-free beers have come a long way since 2007, when two sorghum-based beers Anheuser-Busch's RedBridge and Lakefront Brewing's New Grist took the Great American Beer Festival's top two spots for gluten-free beer. Since then, the winners have included Strange Brewing Co.'s Gluten-Free Lemon Pale and The Alchemist's Celia Pale Ale. Another contender is Harvester Brewing, a Portland company that uses gluten-free oats and chestnuts from Oregon., And the trading of gluten-free home-brewing tips online, along with gluten-reducing enzymes like Clarex, means that celiac beer-lovers can tinker with their own recipes, as well., In fact, Abbey says, she and a friend recently used her brewing kit to make a batch of gluten-free beer. After considering roasted millet and malted buckwheat, they settled on sorghum extract and a large dose of hops., It was delicious, she says. It made me think that beer was possible again.
What's today's big jobs report say?, The U.S. economy lost 2.8 million jobs jobs in January., What?!, Don't panic. The U.S. economy loses millions of jobs every January, in good times and bad, largely because tons of seasonal holiday jobs always wind down after Christmas., So if you set aside the normal, seasonal stuff, how is the job market doing?, The wonks who write the jobs report can answer that! They look at the typical, seasonal things that happen every year, do some math, and come up with a seasonally adjusted number. This is the number that gets widely reported in the news. So:, The U.S. economy added 157,000 jobs last month, after accounting for normal seasonal fluctuations. That's not great, but it's not bad., OK!, Of course, the U.S. probably didn't add exactly 157,000 jobs (after accounting for seasonal factors). The truth is, we don't know exactly how many jobs the U.S. added. The jobs number is based on a survey of businesses that employ over 40 million workers, but that still leaves about 90 million workers who aren't captured in the survey., Where are you going with this?, There's a fair bit of uncertainty about what the true jobs number is. In fact, the BLS quantifies the uncertainty. So we can make this bold statement about what the jobs report really says:, There is a 90 percent chance that the U.S. economy added somewhere between 65,000 and 249,000 jobs in January, after adjusting for seasonal fluctuations. There is a 10 percent chance that the U.S. actually added fewer than 65,000 jobs or more than 249,000 jobs during the month., (It's worth noting that if the headline number in the report were 65,000, everybody would be saying it was disastrous; if it were 249,000 everybody would be saying it was fantastic.), I'm afraid to even ask about the unemployment rate., The unemployment rate is based on a separate survey a survey of households, rather than businesses that has its own measure of uncertainty. So:, There's a 90 percent chance that the unemployment rate is between 7.7 percent and 8.1 percent. There's a 10 percent chance that it's either lower than 7.7 percent or higher than 8.1 percent., Is this a very long way of telling me to ignore the jobs report?, No! The jobs report is one of the best ways to figure out what's going on in the economy., You're killing me., The trick is to focus on the long-term trends, and not pay too much attention to any one number., For one thing, the random fluctuations tend to cancel out from one month to the next, so when you look at the pattern over a few months you start to see what's really happening., On top of that, the numbers get more reliable over time, as they are revised based on more complete data. Just today, the government released a big revision for last year. It turns out, the economy added about 300,000 more jobs last year than initially reported., So the jobs numbers I read in the news every month last year were basically wrong?, Exactly! The typical monthly number was off by about 25 percent!, Whatever.
Job seekers came to the ThistleDown Racino and Horseshoe Casino in Warrensvile Hts., Ohio, last month., Job seekers came to the ThistleDown Racino and Horseshoe Casino in Warrensvile Hts., Ohio, last month., (We updated the top of this post at 10:15 a.m. ET.), The U.S. economy produced several hundred thousand more jobs than previously thought in 2011 and 2012 even as the nation's jobless rate remained stuck at a relatively high level, new data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics show., While BLS said the unemployment rate ticked up to 7.9 percent in January from 7.8 percent the month before, it also reported that:, &mdash; Revisions based on data from unemployment insurance tax records indicate there were 422,000 more jobs on public and private payrolls in the spring of 2012 than initially thought., &mdash; In December 2012 alone, public and private employers increased their payrolls by 196,000 jobs, an upward revision from the agency's initial estimate of 155,000., &mdash; And in November, employers' payrolls expanded by 247,000 jobs. That's well above the previous estimate of 161,000., The bureau's data on payroll employment and the jobless rate often seem to be in at least some disagreement. In part that's because they're based on different surveys one of employers to determine the number of jobs and one of households to calculate the unemployment rate., Economists say the figures can also seem to move in opposite directions because as hiring begins to pick up, people who had been too discouraged to look for work return to the labor force. That can expand the rolls of those in the ranks of the unemployed., Overall, Credit Suisse economist Jonathan Basile tells Bloomberg News, the data seem to be saying that improvement in the labor market is continuing., And The Wall Street Journal notes that thanks to revisions in the late 2012 payroll figures:, The average monthly jobs gain for 2012 bounces up to a healthy 181,000. ... Zoom out a bit, and for statistical nerds, that's noteworthy, pushing 2012 just ahead of 2011's monthly average of 175,000 new jobs. It's also enough to make 2012 the best year for job growth since 2005 before anyone on Main Street knew what a CDO was., After the report's release, the White House released an analysis from top economic adviser Alan Krueger in which he says while more work remains to be done, today's employment report provides further evidence that the U.S. economy is continuing to heal from the wounds inflicted by the worst downturn since the Great Depression., From the other side of the political aisle, House Speaker John Boehner's office posted this tweet from the Ohio Republican:, Wrong time for Pres Obama to scrap his jobs council &amp; delay his budget (again)., Over at Planet Money, our friend Jacob Goldstein reads the report and concludes that the truth is, we don't know exactly how many jobs the U.S. added last month. But, as he shows, at least the recent initial estimates have been wrong on the low side., Meanwhile, stocks are up sharply this morning and the Dow Jones industrial average is flirting with 14,000 which is notable because its record closing high was the 14,164.53 level it hit in Oct. 2007. So, it would seem the market is happy about the jobs data., Update at 8:35 a.m. ET. Unemployment Rate Ticked Up In January; 157,000 Jobs Added: The nation's jobless rate edged up to 7.9 percent in January from 7.8 percent in December, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reports., Meanwhile, 157,000 jobs were added to public and private payrolls in the month., And, BLS revised up its estimate of job growth in December. It now estimates there were 196,000 jobs added to payrolls, up from its initial estimate of 155,000., We'll have more on the report and reactions to it as the morning continues., Our original post:, The Bureau of Labor Statistics is due to tell us at 8:30 a.m. ET about the nation's unemployment rate in January and how many jobs were hopefully added to public and private payrolls last month., A month ago, BLS said there were 155,000 new jobs in December and that the unemployment rate that month was 7.8 percent. Heading into today's reports, economists told Reuters they were expecting to hear that there were 160,000 added to payrolls in January and that the jobless rate stayed at 7.8 percent., We'll update this post with the January news after it's released, and then sift through the data and reactions.
The Epic Battle for America's Eyeballs, by Gina Keating, Hardcover, 286 pages | purchase, More on this book:, Netflix customers will soon have a new option: Along with the company's usual offerings, viewers will be able to watch a new show called House of Cards, a political drama adapted from a British show, and starring Kevin Spacey. David Fincher (known for The Social Network and Seven) will direct the first two episodes. But what's new about House of Cards is that all 13 episodes will be available at once and they were financed by Netflix itself., Netflix actually started creating its own content several years ago, creating a film production and distribution arm called Red Envelope. That was really to ingratiate themselves with the filmmaking community, especially the independent filmmaking community, but also to have some sort of original programming that wasn't too expensive, author Gina Keating tells NPR's Steve Inskeep. Keating's latest book is Netflixed: The Epic Battle for America's Eyeballs,, The company folded Red Envelope in 2008, but is now moving back into content production with House of Cards. Keating says Netflix's goals are a little different now. This is a much bigger bet. It's a lot more expensive; it is going to hit their bottom line in terms of cost, she says, and the objective here is to sign up subscribers that's all it is. It's to bring people in the door, get them to see House of Cards, and then look around and see what else there is, and stick around. And at $100 million committed for two seasons, it is indeed a big bet., Keating says House of Cards could revolutionize television production. All of those episodes are going to be put up at once, so it could really subvert the traditional storyline telling, where you have multiple storylines that you need to carry out through different episodes., With every episode available at once, House of Cards won't be appointment viewing. But, Keating says, that could work in Netflix's favor. I don't think people enjoy appointment viewing any more. I think they still talk about the series that they want to see. They share you know, I loved Weeds, I love whatever program they've been watching and I think Netflix has an advantage that I don't think any other purveyor of content has, and that is 15 years of data on subscribers, not just on what they like, but also on how they use the service ... and they can program to that., They have a very powerful matching algorithm that underpins the way that your Netflix page works, she continues. Everybody's Netflix page looks different based on what they've viewed in the past and liked. And then they can aggregate those communities to create audiences for content., Read an excerpt of Netflixed
Union leaders representing engineers at Boeing voted Thursday to include strike authorization on ballots going to members next week., Here's more from the Society of Professional Engineering Employees in Aerospace:, Council representatives voted to add strike authorization to the ballots during a special meeting Thursday (Jan. 31). The councils' also voted to join the two negotiation teams in their recommendations that SPEEA members REJECT the company's latest contract offers to 7,400 Technical and 15, 550 Professional employees. The votes by the Technical Unit representatives were unanimous. The Professional Unit representatives voted to add strike authorization to the ballot and recommend rejection with only one dissenting vote., Members have until 5 p.m. on Feb. 19 to cast their vote., Ashley Gross, a reporter for NPR member station KPIU, reported on the standoff between the two sides on Thursday's Morning Edition She says that the urgency of the investigation into malfunctioning batteries on Boeing's 787 Dreamliner aircraft brought both sides closer to a deal, but they are both still at loggerheads. Here's an excerpt from her report:, Boeing wants to offer new employees a so-called defined contribution plan like a 401(k) instead of a defined benefit plan like a traditional pension. Boeing is just following lots of other companies, such as GE, Lockheed Martin and the automakers., She adds that Boeing's pension obligation totals $75 billion, more than its stock market value; the pension is only three-quarters funded. And here's the key:, The union says new hires will be shortchanged. Company officials concede new workers will get less than current employees, but they say the offer is still generous. So that's a pickle: Do current employees strike on behalf of future employees? Union leaders say this is important because giving in would split employees into factions and start a downward slide in compensation.
For Americans with criminal records, it can be tough to land job interviews especially when employers bar them from applying., For Americans with criminal records, it can be tough to land job interviews especially when employers bar them from applying., Melissa spent months looking for a job any job. For days, the 25-year-old consistently visited her welfare-to-work program in downtown Brooklyn, resume in hand and an interview smile splashed across her face. Every day, Monday through Friday, 9 to 4, she explains. That's dedication. Melissa, who asked us to not reveal her last name, has plenty of job experience. She's a self-identified people person and says she aces every interview. But there's just one thing holding her back: the past. When she was 15 years old, Melissa hung out with an older man, who she says manipulated her and eventually became her pimp. She was 19 when she pleaded guilty to her third and final conviction for loitering for prostitution., I had no knowledge. I was young and I was like 'OK, whatever, yes, just let me go home,' she says., She had no idea that her past, and not necessarily just the tough job climate, would be a roadblock to a salary years after her convictions., Melissa is just one of the millions with criminal records who face higher hurdles than most in finding employment. According to some estimates, 1 in 5 Americans has a criminal record which can last a lifetime., Employers Flouting The Law , While it's generally illegal for employers to indiscriminately deny all applicants with criminal records, many still do. A quick look at New York job postings on Craigslist, for example, reveals common caveats: absolutely no felony convictions or must have clean criminal record., This is blatantly illegal hiring practice, says Sally Friedman, a lawyer at the Legal Action Center., It's not that it's against the law to consider a job applicant's past convictions. In fact, it's kind of the opposite. The no-criminal-records-allowed policy rule, Friedman explains, may lead employers to throw out solid candidates., They have to look at each person individually; that's New York's law, she says., But even in New York, which leads the country in legal protections for people with criminal records, finding a job with a record of convictions or arrests can be tough., Melissa says she recently landed a job selling tickets at a tourist attraction, only to receive an email the day before orientation that read, We must withdraw our offer due to the background check., That had me upset also, she says. Like, wow, I can't even get a job doing cashiering. What kind of work can I do?, The employer didn't respond to a request for comment, but Melissa says that kind of outright rejection is common. Even more commonly, she never gets a call back when an application asks if she has any convictions and she marks yes., Limited Job Prospects, But is that actually discrimination? Princeton professor Devah Pager researched that question in the New York City Hiring Discrimination Study. We hired groups of young men to pose as job applicants, and we sent them all over New York City applying for real low-wage, entry-level job openings, she explains., Researchers recruited young men who were similar in job experience, education, skills, and even physical attractiveness. They sent them to 250 employers with fictitious resumes that were identical with the exception that some had a minor drug possession conviction., Results revealed that the job applicant with a conviction was nearly 50 percent less likely to be called back or receive a job offer., It's clear that simply having a criminal record irrespective of any other personal characteristics about the candidates had a huge negative impact on their likelihood of finding work, even in these kinds of low-wage, low-skill kinds of positions, Pager explains., Melissa's strategy for dealing with that bias is to try avoiding the issue entirely., So, I basically had it in my mind 'OK, if I get a job, I need a place that's not gonna run a background check because if they do I'm not getting hired,' she says with a reserved chuckle. So that was my new game plan., It's a plan that has real costs. According to a survey from the Society for Human Resources Management, 2 out of 3 employers require a background check for every single hire., But for Melissa, at least, it seems to have paid off. She recently landed a job at a grocery chain that didn't require a background check., Getting the feel of, you know, receiving a paycheck, that's the best thing, really, she says., It's a paycheck that comes out to about $175 a week a salary for her, her 19-year-old brother and a 2-year-old daughter.
A $20.1 billion merger of beer conglomerates is now delayed, after the U.S. Justice Department sued to stop Anheuser-Busch InBev's acquisition of Mexico's dominant brewer, Grupo Modelo, Thursday. The agency's antitrust division says the two corporations haven't done enough to protect consumers., The deal would put Corona, Bud Light, Stella Artois, and other popular beers under the same corporate umbrella, ending the competition that Justice officials say has resulted in lower prices. The Mexican government approved the merger last November., In its proposed form, the merger would result in less competition and higher beer prices for American consumers, says Bill Baer, Assistant Attorney General, of the Antitrust Division. If ABI fully owned and controlled Modelo, ABI would be able to increase beer prices to American consumers. This lawsuit seeks to prevent ABI from eliminating Modelo as an important competitive force in the beer industry., Citing the Justice Department's complaint, Bloomberg News reports that Modelo's and AB InBev's pricing strategies are diametrically opposed, with Modelo consistently providing pressure for lower prices, in contrast with ABI's well-established practice of leading prices upward., Reacting to the suit, AB InBev called the U.S. move inconsistent with the law, the facts and the reality of the market place. The company promised to vigorously contest the DOJ's action in federal court., The company also said that the merger, which would give AB InBev the remaining portion of Grupo Modelo that it doesn't control, will now be delayed until after the first quarter of 2013., Last October, SAB Miller's Coors Light supplanted Budweiser as the No. 2 beer in the U.S. But SAB Miller produces less than half the amount of beer that a combined AB InBev-Grupo Modelo would, according to Bloomberg.
The White House said today that it would not extend the term of its jobs council, a group of high-profile executives tapped for advice on how to improve the country's jobs situation., The AP explains that the council was formed in January 2011 with a sunset date of January 31, 2013. Reuters reports that an official said Obama would allow the jobs council to disband, adding that the administration had made progress on some of the council's recommendations., The AP adds:, Officials said the president always intended for the council to fulfill its mission and then wind down, and said Obama would continue to actively engage and seek input from business leaders about ways to accelerate job-creation and economic growth. Among the steps Obama plans to pursue are expedited permits for infrastructure projects, plus programs to boost entrepreneurship and workforce development., Even before it was clear whether Obama would renew the jobs council, Republicans seized on its likely expiration as evidence the president has devoted insufficient attention to creating jobs, which polling shows remains a top priority for Americans. The Republican National Committee dubbed it part of 'the failed Obama record,' while the House Republicans' campaign committee, in an online petition, accused Obama of laying off his own jobs council., When Obama created the council, unemployment was about 9 percent. Today, it is at 7.8 percent., Economic growth, however, has been sluggish. Wednesday, the Bureau of Economic Analysis said that for the first time in three years, the country's GDP shrank at a 0.1 percent annual rate., On Friday, the Bureau of Labor Statistics is scheduled to release employment numbers for January.
Consumer spending rose in 2012, but not by as much as the year before. In December, these shoppers were out and about in Glendale, Calif., Consumer spending rose in 2012, but not by as much as the year before. In December, these shoppers were out and about in Glendale, Calif., Americans' personal incomes grew by 3.5 percent in 2012, compared with 5.1 percent growth the year before, the Bureau of Economic Analysis reports. And it says consumer spending rose 3.6 percent last year, vs. 5 percent in 2011., But the year ended on one strong note: in December alone, incomes rose 2.6 percent from the month before. That's the biggest one-month rise in eight years, The Wall Street Journal says. Consumer spending was up 0.2 percent in December from November., Also this morning, the Employment and Training Administration reported that there were 368,000 first-time claims for unemployment benefits last week. That's up 38,000 from the week before. The increase is from a five-year low and puts claims back at levels consistent with modest job growth, Reuters writes., The week's big economic indicator is due Friday at 8:30 a.m. ET. That's when the Bureau of Labor Statistics will issue its figures on job growth and unemployment in January. According to Bloomberg News, economists expect to hear that there were 165,000 jobs added to payrolls (vs. 155,000 in December) and that the unemployment rate remained unchanged at 7.8 percent.
Honey, what if the kids don't want it?, Honey, what if the kids don't want it?, It may sound like a line from The Godfather, but some agricultural specialists advise that farming isn't personal; it's business. And family farms need to think and act more like a business to survive in a competitive world, says Bernie Erven, professor emeritus in the department of agricultural economics at Ohio State University., Last week, Erven spoke to farmers at the Growing Michigan Agriculture Conference about how to improve their practices to recruit, hire and keep the best employees by using modern methods, like social media., But the message may be a tough sell. Family farms are an iconic American institution, and they make up nearly 96 percent of farms in America, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture. And it's hard for some folks to hear that the best hire might not be your sister's kid who needs a summer job baling hay., If you hire a family member who isn't qualified, who doesn't fit the position, and maybe doesn't even want the position, then it's ... unlikely the person would succeed, Erven says. Thus [it's] not helping the business and not helping the family., If family farms don't approach hiring in a professional way, there are some uncertainties for both the farm and its employees, he says. [Will] they treat adding employees as a family matter or is it a business decision? he says., According to the 2007 USDA Census of Agriculture, U.S. farms spend a total of $21.9 billion per year employing 2.6 million hired workers. Streamlining and standardizing hiring processes on family farms could have a significant economic impact., New outside hiring practices could even help farm families alleviate the expectations of both parents and children. This argument that you owe it to your children to have a place for them in the farm business, I have trouble with that. Because the other side of that coin is that then your children owe it to you to stay home, even if they don't want to, Erven says., Additionally, a diverse labor force can help boost the farm's main goal: efficient food production. For example, dairy workers who have experience working with different cattle breeds may bring fresh perspectives and new techniques additions that can improve farming practices, Erven tells The Salt., But pushing the family out of family farms can have disadvantages, too, Jennifer Fahy, communications director at Farm Aid, says in an email. The family farm is a place where kids grow up and learn responsibility and skills ... they're also learning values and traditions, she says., Fahy says that the American farming workforce is aging and in desperate need of young farmers to carry on the tradition. A major factor in young people being interested in becoming farmers is the exposure they receive on their family's farm, she says. That process of farmers passing down their life's work and traditions to the next generations is so important to the fabric of our food production system and culture., Farm managers might be able to find the most qualified employees outside of the family, but Fahy says that family tradition is also an important consideration. There's something beyond experience and skills at work when a family farmer can involve the next generation, she says.
Note: We originally published a version of this post a few weeks ago. We are republishing it now to coincide with our story airing today on Morning Edition., All kinds of proposals to reduce gun violence have been floated recently. One idea that has gotten the attention of economists is liability insurance. Most states require car owners to have liability insurance to cover damages their vehicles cause to others; some economists think we should require the same of gun owners., We reached out to a few economists to get their thoughts., Justin Wolfers, professor of economics and public policy at the University of Michigan, wrote:, The real problem with gun ownership is that they involve externalities, which is economist-speak for the fact that your gun may be used to hurt others. For instance, when Nancy Lanza purchased her Bushmaster AR-15, she probably weighed the benefits of owning the gun the joy of ownership with the price (about $800). But it's unlikely she considered the loss, pain and grief that might follow if it were used by her son to kill 26 innocents. When people fail to consider the broader social costs of choices like buying a gun, they're more likely to do them, and society suffers., The economic answer is simple: Make potential gun owners take account of these potential social costs. One way to do this would be to charge an annual license fee for each gun you keep. Research by economists Phil Cook and Jens Ludwig suggests that the typical social cost of one more gun-owning household is somewhere between $100 and $1,800 per year. While that's a wide range, if we set a gun ownership license fee this high, it would force gun owners to face the true social costs of their choices, which would lead many fewer to buy guns., Another even more powerful approach is to recognize that the problem isn't guns per se, but gun violence. Thus, instead of taxing guns, we should tax gun violence. Basically, this is the same as saying that we should make gun owners liable for any damage their guns do. Not only would this discourage some people from buying guns, it would lead those who do keep guns to be more careful with how they're stored. Indeed, greater care would surely have kept Adam Lanza out of his mother's cache. The problem, though, is that Nancy Lanza is neither with us to pay the damages her gun caused, nor could she afford to pay for the enormous damage her gun wrought in Newtown. And so the only way this solution works is if guns required mandatory liability insurance, much as we force car owners to buy insurance for the damage their machines wreak., It's the sort of careful solution that would enable people who enjoy hunting to continue with their passions, but also push them to take the sorts of precautions that we all wish the Lanza household had taken. If the gun lobby were smart, and if they really are interested in being socially responsible while keeping their weapons, they would be pushing hard for this sort of policy., Next, Russ Roberts, a research fellow at the Hoover Institution and host of EconTalk:, Is it a good idea to require gun owners to purchase liability insurance that would cover damages caused by the guns they own? In the wake of the Newtown tragedy, such policies seem like nothing more than common sense. The cost of the insurance would deter some from owning guns or at least from owning an arsenal, as the cost of insurance would presumably rise with the size of one's collection. And there is a certain logic to requiring insurance. When a person purchases a gun, she may not consider the possible harm that might come to others from the eventual use of the gun. Adding the cost of insurance might make the purchaser bear the full cost of the gun in the future, which could easily exceed the purchase itself. After all, registering a car requires insurance on the grounds that cars can cause involuntary harm to others. The insurance forces the driver to bear those costs that might come to pass that are borne by others in an accident., But the logic is not quite as neat as it might appear. Many people already buy and own guns illegally without license or registration. Adding the cost of insurance would further discourage honest gun ownership. That would make matters worse, not better. And is it so obvious that all guns are harmful to others and that gun ownership should be made more expensive to every owner? When an honest, law-abiding citizen uses a gun in self-defense, it often protects those nearby who are unarmed. Perhaps gun ownership should be subsidized for honest people. I don't think this is a good idea, but raising the cost of gun ownership, particularly for good and honest people who are likely to use a gun only in self-defense, is not a free lunch., What is really behind the call for liability insurance is the natural urge to make it harder for people to own guns. Such a law might do some good if it made dishonest and violent people less likely to own guns. But liability insurance makes gun ownership more expensive for honest, law-abiding people while encouraging dishonest and dangerous people to own guns in ways we cannot see., And, Robert Frank, professor of economics at Cornell University:, Gun ownership, even in the hands of responsible people, increases the risk of death and serious injury to others. In cases involving multiple deaths, few gun owners could afford to compensate victims' families for their losses, just as most automobile owners couldn't afford to compensate the families of accident victims. With automobiles, we require all vehicle owners to carry liability insurance. A similar approach would help with firearms., Nothing in the constitution grants people the right to expose others to serious risk without compensation. Insurance sellers are skillful at estimating the risks posed by drivers with specific characteristics, and we could expect them to be similarly skillful at assessing the risks posed by gun owners. Requiring liability insurance isn't a total solution to the problem of excessive risk, either for autos or for guns. But in both cases, it's a positive step.
A Boeing 787 under construction inside a production facility at a Boeing plant in Everett, Wash., last year., A Boeing 787 under construction inside a production facility at a Boeing plant in Everett, Wash., last year., Boeing is scrambling to figure out why batteries malfunctioned on its 787, prompting officials to ground the airplane this month. And at a time when Boeing most needs its skilled engineers, they're weighing a possible strike. Union leaders are considering the company's final contract offer., The standoff between Boeing and about 23,000 engineers and technicians mostly in the Seattle region has been brewing for months. Dozens of them recently packed a union hall south of Seattle for training in how to run a picket line., Members of the Society of Professional Engineering Employees in Aerospace are white-collar workers, some with Ph.D.s, who design Boeing's airplanes not the type normally associated with picket lines. They embrace their geeky image with their slogan No Nerds, No Birds. Their only major strike was in 2000. But contract negotiations this time have left many of them upset., It is hard for me to understand why the company insists we have to make concessions in our contract at this point, says union President Tom McCarty. The company is doing very well and we're a big factor in making that success., Despite the Dreamliner crisis, Boeing has been doing well it had record sales last year. The urgency of the 787 investigation brought the union and company closer to an agreement. But they're still at loggerheads. Boeing wants to offer new employees a so-called defined contribution plan like a 401(k) instead of a defined benefit plan like a traditional pension. Boeing is just following lots of other companies, such as GE, Lockheed Martin and the automakers., Most corporations are trying to de-risk, says Olivia Mitchell, who specializes in pensions at the Wharton school of business at the University of Pennsylvania., What that means is they're trying to get out of the mold where they're having their contribution amounts jackknifed by the economy, by interest rates, by the stock market and move to a more predictable funding flow, Mitchell says., Boeing's pension obligation totals $75 billion, which is more than the company's entire stock market value. Boeing has been putting money into it, but it's still only three-quarters funded., Company executives declined an interview, but Mike Delaney, vice president of engineering, spoke with reporters about the contract talks earlier this month, before the FAA grounded the 787. At the time, he said keeping costs down is key., We don't want just any deal we want a deal that works for the company both short-term and long-term, Delaney said., The union says new hires will be shortchanged. Company officials concede new workers will get less than current employees, but they say the offer is still generous. So that's a pickle: Do current employees strike on behalf of future employees? Union leaders say this is important because giving in would split employees into factions and start a downward slide in compensation., This is a headache they do not need at this point in time, says aviation analyst Scott Hamilton. He says Boeing can't afford an engineer walkout right now. Its top priority has to be fixing the 787., They're not even able to test fly the airplane at this point, so the longer the airplane's on the ground, the more costly it's going to be to Boeing, Hamilton says., Union leaders will decide Thursday whether to have engineers and technicians vote to authorize a strike. If that happens, membership will have until mid-February to decide whether to approve a walkout.
Spending cuts that are part of the looming sequester could cause big job losses in defense and other industries., Spending cuts that are part of the looming sequester could cause big job losses in defense and other industries., There are some people who viewed the news that the economy shrank toward the end of the year as a bracing wake-up call, a gloomy foreshadowing of what could happen if even bigger automatic reductions start March 1. But don't count on it changing the dynamics of the current debate over the so-called sequester., If Congress fails to reach agreement to stop a sequester, the Defense Department would take a $500 billion hit; $700 billion would come from other domestic discretionary programs., Steve Bell of the Bipartisan Policy Center in Washington, D.C., worked on Capitol Hill for 39 years, on and off, much of that time as a top aide on the Senate Budget Committee when Republicans were in charge. He's still in touch with people in Congress., Asked in an interview how much his Hill contacts reacted to news that a 22.2 percent drop in defense spending led to the U.S.'s fourth-quarter gross domestic product shrinking by 0.1 percent, Bell said:, Not much. There is a sense of resignation among many members on the Hill. The pro-defense people have kind of lost momentum. The big deficit hawks have gained momentum. And the general, not a majority yet, but certainly a strong minority consensus is: 'Let the sequester occur. It's the only spending cuts we're ever going to get out of this entire mess from the last four years.' And I think that idea is gaining momentum. It is beginning to make the defense hawks deeply concerned., Bell isn't in that camp. He says Wednesday's GDP report was a serious warning of the kind of economic disruption that will occur if the sequester is allowed to go forward. The Bipartisan Policy Center warned that the threat of future cuts would cause companies to act pre-emptively to gird themselves through layoffs and other actions., The sequester, and its impact on defense, we believe, will lead to furloughs of civilian defense workers. It will lead to either the sale or bankruptcy of very small subcontractors, things that are occurring right now in the Washington, D.C., area. People are selling their small businesses to larger defense contractors because they can't stay in business. And we think the net effect will probably be, conservatively, a million lost jobs just from the defense sequester alone., Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich., who chairs the Senate Armed Services Committee, was among those who saw Wednesday's news as a clamorous klaxon horn sounding danger. In a statement, he said:, We must avoid sequestration because of the damage it would do to the economy, to important domestic investments and to our national security. Today's GDP report demonstrates what is at stake economically. Top economists have warned us that sequestration could send us back into recession, and we should heed their warnings., Others who saw danger signals were, not surprisingly, defense contractors who have much at stake. Marion Blakey, president of the Aerospace Industries Association, said in an interview:, It's what we have been warning about for months and months, because we do know that the cuts to defense spending that are already in place through the Budget Control Act are causing our companies to pull back, laying off workers. That's going on right now. It has real effects in terms of their ability to invest in R&D;, to train. There are a variety of aspects that all have an economic impact. We know if a sequester goes into effect, we're going to see a much more dramatic acceleration of job losses., Blakey cites a study by George Mason University economists that forecast 2 million lost jobs in the first year of a sequester., Douglas Holtz-Eakin, president of the American Action Forum, a former Congressional Budget Office director and a favorite of Capitol Hill conservatives, doesn't disagree that the sequester is a bad idea. But he thinks too much is being made of the fourth-quarter GDP data., He notes that the third quarter saw defense spending rise robustly, and he expects the Commerce Department number-crunchers to eventually revise upward the fourth-quarter data. In an interview, he said:, It would be better not to have [the sequester] happen, but this isn't why. You can make too much of today's GDP report pretty easily ... if you ignore the weird timing and look between midyear and now, defense spending dropped at about a 6 percent annual rate. And that's what we expect to be happening., The U.S. military withdrawals from Iraq and Afghanistan, as well as the Pentagon following orders to downsize over 10 years, explains part of what we're seeing, Holtz-Eakin said., Is the sequester a good idea? No. It was supposed to be such a bad idea that we'd do something good. The fact that it was a bad idea originally hasn't changed. It's still a bad idea. It shouldn't happen., That said, here's where Holtz-Eakin makes defense contractors and many others nervous:, I don't think that if the 2013 sequester happened it would be the end of the world. I think the economy could still grow., But he said the 10 years worth of sequester cuts to defense and domestic discretionary spending is the wrong strategy. It's more like the European-style austerity that has helped throw many of those nations into recession. The focus really should be on entitlement cuts., Of course, the reason we got the sequester in the first place was because of the competing and partisan views of reality in Washington. Wednesday offered little relief on that front., White House spokesman Jay Carney blamed Republicans for letting matters get to the present stage. He said in his Wednesday briefing:, Talk about letting the sequester kick in as though that were an acceptable thing belies where Republicans were on this issue not that long ago, and it makes clear again that this is sort of political brinksmanship of the kind that results in one primary victim, and that's American taxpayers, the American middle class. You're correct that the GDP number we saw today was driven in part by in large part by a sharp decrease in defense spending, the sharpest drop since I think 1972. And at least some of that has to do with the uncertainty created by the prospect of sequester., To which House Republicans attempted to hold up a mirror to President Obama., Brendan Buck, a spokesman for House Speaker John Boehner, said in a statement:, These arbitrary, automatic cuts were a creation and demand of the White House in 2011. Twice the House has passed legislation to replace them with common-sense cuts and reforms. If there was any uncertainty late last year about the sequester, it was because the Democratic-controlled Senate, per usual, never lifted a finger to pass a plan to replace it.
Investigators are still looking into the cause of fires and overheating aboard Boeing's new 787s., Investigators are still looking into the cause of fires and overheating aboard Boeing's new 787s., Boeing generated more cash than expected last year and reclaimed the top spot over rival Airbus as the world's biggest airplane maker., But all that was overshadowed by the fact that its entire fleet of 787s is grounded after batteries on two of its planes either overheated or caught fire., For 2013, our first order of business, obviously, is getting the 787 back into service, Boeing CEO James McNerney says., With the National Transportation Safety Board and the Federal Aviation Administration investigating the incidents, McNerney said repeatedly on a conference call he could not hazard any guesses about how and when the review would turn out. ., I can't predict an outcome and I'm not going to, he says. We're in the middle of an investigation. We're making progress on the investigation. We've got every expert in the world looking at this issue., In the meantime, McNerney says, Boeing plans to keep building the planes on schedule., Business as usual, let's keep making planes and then let's ramp up as we've planned, he says., But some are not so sure about continuing the assembly line., I'm skeptical, only because we don't know what we don't know, Scott Hamilton, an aviation industry consultant, says., Without new information, he says it's impossible to gauge the potential impact of the 787's grounding on Boeing., We don't know what the problem is, we don't know what the solution is, we don't know what the design of the fix will be, we don't know how long the planes will be on the ground, Hamilton says., The investigations have centered on the plane's new lithium-ion batteries notable for both their power and volatility. Several media reports said airlines had returned large numbers of faulty batteries. In Wednesday's call, however, McNerney dismissed those issues as routine maintenance unrelated to the recent overheating incidents., I'm a little surprised that McNerney was so definitive in dismissing the possible connection because I don't think we know, Hamilton says., Boeing's struggles with the 787 go back in time., Initial production faced over three years of delays and billions of money in extra costs. The complexities stem in part from the use of new, fuel-efficient technology and materials, and the plane comprises thousands of components made by over 100 manufacturers., So far, the planes have been grounded for two weeks., Oppenheimer aviation analyst Yair Reiner says the longer the investigation drags out, the more it's an indication the problem is complicated perhaps going beyond just battery issues and therefore more expensive to fix., That progress seems to be evolving more slowly than they might have earlier expected, Reiner says., He says coming off a strong 2012 puts Boeing in a good position heading into difficulties. Still, he says, the company really wants to avoid slowing its manufacturing schedule which could anger airline customers waiting for their new fleets., Boeing still has a leash of several weeks, maybe a couple of months, to resolve this before it will likely have to slow down production, he said., The company's stock closed up 1 percent today and is down 3 percent since its planes were grounded.
Looking for work: In Birmingham, Ala., last summer, Jessica McQueen (left) and Ashley Abramson were among those filling out applications at a jobs fair., Looking for work: In Birmingham, Ala., last summer, Jessica McQueen (left) and Ashley Abramson were among those filling out applications at a jobs fair., After bad news about late 2012 that the U.S. economy shrank a bit in the fourth quarter there's modestly good news about early 2013:, Private employers added an estimated 192,000 jobs to their payrolls in January, according to the latest ADP National Employment Report. That would be above the estimated 185,000 jobs they added in December., Would be are two key words in that sentence, by the way. ADP also said today that it has revised downward by 30,000 its estimate of job growth in December. It initially said employers added 215,000 jobs. So treat its January figure as a preliminary estimate., We'll hear much more about the January employment picture on Friday when the Bureau of Labor Statistics is due to release its figures on the month's unemployment rate and payroll growth. Reuters says that economists expect BLS will say that public and private employers added 160,000 jobs in January and that the unemployment rate held steady at 7.8 percent. The BLS and ADP estimates on jobs are based on different surveys of employers, which partly explains why they do not quite match up but do tend to agree on the general trend.
The U.S. economy shrank at a 0.1 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter, the Bureau of Economic Analysis reports, its first quarterly contraction since the second quarter of 2009., Economists were not expecting to hear that. Before the number was released, they were predicting BEA would say there was modest 1.1 percent growth in the last three months of 2012., According to BEA: the decrease in real [gross domestic product] in the fourth quarter primarily reflected negative contributions from private inventory investment, federal government spending, and exports that were partly offset by positive contributions from personal consumption expenditures, nonresidential fixed investment, and residential fixed investment. The Associated Press says the main factor was the biggest cut in defense spending in 40 years., More defense cuts are ahead unless lawmakers act to prevent the automatic sequester that kicks in on March 1., Today's fourth-quarter GDP report is the first of three estimates BEA will issue, so there is a chance that in coming months it will say that there was at least some growth in the quarter. The next estimate is due on Feb. 28., Also in the report, BEA said that the economy grew 1.5 percent from the end of 2011 through the end of 2012. Comparisons:, &mdash; 2 percent growth from the end of 2010 through 2011., &mdash; 2.4 percent growth from the end of 2009 through 2010., &mdash; A 0.1 percent decline in GDP from the end of 2008 through 2009., &mdash; A 3.3 percent decline in GDP from the end of 2008 through 2008., Technically, the economy went into recession at the end of 2007 and emerged in mid-2009., Update at 9 a.m. ET. Some Modestly Good Economic News:, 192,000 Jobs Added To Payrolls This Month, Report Signals
Fill out an application for a loan, and your wage history may go places you didn't expect., Fill out an application for a loan, and your wage history may go places you didn't expect., If you've earned a paycheck in recent years, you'll probably want want to know about this:, The Equifax credit reporting agency, NBC News reports, has collected 190 million employment and salary records on about one-third of U.S. adults and has sold some of the information to debt collectors, financial service companies and other entities., Robert Mather, who runs a small employment background company named Pre-Employ.com, tells the network that it's the biggest privacy breach in our time, and it's legal and no one knows it's going on. ... It's like a secret CIA., In an email to NBC News, Equifax says it complies with Fair Credit Reporting Act guidelines, that the companies buying the information must have a permissible purpose and that consumers give the companies the OK to get the data when they apply for credit. Presumably, the OK is in the fine print.
Ongoing beach nourishment, like this project in Viriginia Beach, has been the topic of debate. Some people say it's needed to protect beach communities; others decry the costs., Ongoing beach nourishment, like this project in Viriginia Beach, has been the topic of debate. Some people say it's needed to protect beach communities; others decry the costs., For a half-century, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has been in the beach business, dredging up new sand as shorelines wash away. Federal disaster aid for Superstorm Sandy could provide billions more for beach rebuilding, and that has revived an old debate: Is this an effective way to protect against storms, or a counterproductive waste of tax dollars?, On a recent blustery day at Virginia Beach, the latest beach nourishment project is in full swing. A bulldozer smooths out pyramids of sand, and on the horizon, a large, black hopper dredge appears with another load., It has sucked up the sand like a giant vacuum cleaner, from five to 10 miles offshore, and is now pumping it into a large metal pipe that runs up onshore. The pipe feeds into a boxy yellow filter, from which a mud-gray mix of sand and water sprays out., By late spring, Army Corps of Engineers Project Manager Jennifer Armstrong says, a total of 1.25 million cubic yards of sand will be spread along this strip, making the beach hundreds of feet wider., As wave energy comes in, it absorbs that energy, she says. It's designed to be a sacrificial buffer., Picking Up The Reconstruction Tab, The cost to federal taxpayers is about $9 million. But this is the 49th time this strip has been built up since 1951, mostly with federal money., Armstrong says with its current long-term project, the Army Corps will do it again and again as needed., The thing that I try to stress to people is we're only about 11 years into this project, she says, and already we've prevented $443 million in damages. It has already paid for itself and all planned renourishment cycles over the next four to three years., That's the estimated storm damage not done to the strip of high-rise chain hotels that line the shore and that make up the heart of Virginia Beach's tourism economy., The Inception Of The Program, These are the Ash Wednesday Storm photos, explains Phil Roehrs, Virginia Beach's water resources engineer, showing framed photos of the same hotel strip after a devastating storm in 1962., During the height of the storm, he says, large segments of the seawall were completely blown out, exposing the hotels to direct wave attack., That storm kicked off the Army Corps' replenishment program in earnest, all along the East Coast. Roehrs says beaches are just like roads or bridges public infrastructure that needs routine repair. And that maintenance, he says, has helped prevent untold damage. He points at New Jersey after Sandy for an example., Township A had a protection plan in place, and Township B, right next door, didn't, and township B suffered tragically, he says. It's better to pay for a little protection than a whole lot of cleanup., Federal- Or Local-Level Subsidization? , Some coastal geologists aren't convinced, suggesting there were many factors that could have made a difference in how towns weathered Sandy. Congressional disaster aid allocates money to study what worked. But there is criticism, regardless., This is a particularly silly form of disaster relief, says Eli Lehrer of the libertarian R Street Institute. He's also co-founder of SmarterSafer, a Washington, D.C., coalition of environmental groups and budget watchdogs., Some call beach refurbishment welfare for the rich, and others say it's necessary for local communities., Some call beach refurbishment welfare for the rich, and others say it's necessary for local communities., Beach renourishment creates a false sense of security that tends to induce development in the very areas where it's most likely to be destroyed by nature's worst, he says., In other words, create a wide swath of sand, and people will build there even if it would otherwise be deemed folly. Lehrer says replenishing remote barrier islands is the most egregious waste of taxpayer money. For a tourism-dependent place like Virginia Beach, he concedes it makes economic sense for that particular town., If it's going to be paid for with public dollars at all, those public dollars ought to be collected very much at the local level, he says., Currently, the federal government pays 65 percent of beach nourishment projects, while local communities finance the rest. President Bill Clinton and President George W. Bush tried and failed to reduce the federal share. President Obama has tightened regulations for which projects qualify. But Congress approves the funding, and it turns out beach nourishment is a pretty popular program., Is It Really Needed?, Howard Marlowe lobbies for more than a dozen beach communities, including residential areas in North Carolina., These are cottages, they're for rent, and we have so many congressional staff going there [for vacation], it always amazes me, he says., Marlow has an answer ready for the question, Why should taxpayers in Iowa or Nebraska subsidize this?, Because the taxpayers in Iowa and Nebraska are actually going to those beaches, he says., Communities must offer public access to get federal funding for beach replenishment. Still, the program has been slammed as welfare for the rich, since it pumps up the value of plenty of private beachfront homes. Marlowe says it may be viewed as unfair, but he doesn't think it is., We budget $2 billion a year in this country to fight wildfires, and that's not disaster, that is every year, he says. And we don't fight wildfires for any reason other than to protect the homes that are anywhere nearby., The Other Side Of The Debate, But since Superstorm Sandy, another critique has gained attention, one that makes this task of rebuilding constantly eroding beaches seem even more Sisyphean and costly., Everything we do should be done with the assumption that the sea level's rising, and another Sandy will come by in some number of years, Orrin Pilkey, professor emeritus at Duke University, says., Pilkey has criticized federal beach nourishment for decades. And now, he says, studies show a warming planet is causing sea levels to rise even faster, especially in the mid-Atlantic. There's no avoiding it, he says., If I was king of New Jersey, for example, buildings that were within two blocks of the beach, I wouldn't replace them if they'd been destroyed, he says. And I would try to move other buildings back from the beach., Workers reconstruct a section of Virginia Beach. The federal government finances 65 percent of beach nourishment projects; local governments pay for the rest., Workers reconstruct a section of Virginia Beach. The federal government finances 65 percent of beach nourishment projects; local governments pay for the rest., Pilkey senses more support for this approach since Sandy. But for public officials like Roehrs, in Virginia Beach, it's easier said than done., The population wants to live at the coast, Roehrs says. It's been that way since recorded history., Roehrs says the Army Corps of Engineers considers sea level rise when it reconstructs beaches. But he cautions against planning too far ahead., If you forecast out 150 years and believe that the sea's going to rise 6 feet, he says, you can easily strangle any attempt to do anything about it, because it's just too large., More sensible, he says, is an incremental approach, planning for 20 years at a time, then creating an assessment., At Virginia Beach's tourist strip, no one seems to be thinking of retreat. Just like the beach, the line of hotels is in a state of ongoing renovation., Roehrs says about a third are new or refurbished. As bulldozers smooth out sand, there's confidence that these high-rises will be safe, and profitable, for a good while to come.
Nearly 44 percent of Americans don't have enough savings or other liquid assets to stay out of poverty for more than three months if they lose their income, according to the Corporation for Enterprise Development., In his inaugural address, President Obama talked about a country where even a little girl born into the bleakest poverty knows that she has the same chance to succeed as anybody else. But in reality, that's not always the case. A new report finds that one of the biggest obstacles for many Americans is that they don't have the savings or assets they need to help them get ahead., Nearly 44 percent of Americans don't have enough savings or other liquid assets to stay out of poverty for more than three months if they lose their income, according to Wednesday's report by the Corporation for Enterprise Development. Almost a third have no savings accounts at all., The nonprofit tries to help low- and moderate-income families achieve the American dream. The group's president, Andrea Levere, says that's not easy when all your energy goes into paying the rent and buying food., It's only when you have those basic needs satisfied that you then can think, 'How do I make sure I have the best education for my children? How do I make sure I have the skills I need to be more competitive in the workplace?' says Levere., The group and others are pushing new efforts to encourage more people to save and to be smart about how they handle money., Michelle Jones of Gaithersburg, Md., for example, says she lost everything when she got involved in drugs a decade ago. She is now trying to rebuild her life., It's hard because right now I have a job that does not have benefits and it's part time. And I'm making like $11 an hour, says Jones., But even so through a program called Maryland CASH Jones has been having $200 a month withheld from her paycheck and automatically put into savings. And it's a good thing too, because in November she was in a car accident., I couldn't work, and my job doesn't pay me when I'm off and I had to use that money to pay my rent, says Jones., It's just the kind of emergency that can send someone without a financial cushion tumbling into tough times., I noticed very early on that money is something that goes to the root of whatever issue is going on, whether it's a health issue [or] a criminal justice issue, says Robin McKinney, a former social worker who now runs Maryland CASH., McKinney says low wages are clearly a problem but so too are some government rules. For example, the state of Maryland used to prohibit public assistance for those with more than $2,000 in assets. But many low-income families qualify for big lump-sum payments through the federal earned income tax credit program., Our average refund is about $2,200, so that's already over that $2,000 asset limit, McKinney says. So if they didn't spend that money down immediately, they were at risk of losing their benefits. This is a huge disincentive to savings., In Maryland, the asset limit has been abolished, and there are similar efforts in other states. Indeed, there's a lot of bipartisan agreement that getting people to save more is a good thing. Stuart Butler with the conservative Heritage Foundation says while problems can be found at all income levels, those at the lower end of the economic ladder are especially vulnerable to financial setbacks., It's almost a double whammy. They don't have a lot of assets, and then when they try to get credit in some ways, it's very expensive and it sucks them into a much worse economic situation over time, and that's really what we've got to try to break out of, says Butler., Both he and McKinney say they're encouraged by a number of initiatives, especially something called prize-linked savings. These are offered by credit unions in Michigan and will be pretty soon in a few other states. The accounts reward savers with a chance to win a big monthly or yearly prize, just like the lottery., What it does is to convert the gambling instinct into a savings instinct, McKinney says., It's an instinct he says needs to become much more widespread, if there's a chance of achieving the president's inaugural dream.
The Deepwater Horizon oil rig burned on April 21, 2010., A federal judge has approved a guilty plea by BP to manslaughter charges in connection with the 2010 Gulf oil spill., The approved deal includes a record $4 billion in criminal penalties., Eleven workers on the Deep Water Horizon rig died in the April 2010 explosion. BP pleaded guilty to manslaughter charges for those deaths and to lying to Congress about the amount of the oil spilling out into the Gulf of Mexico., Family members for some of those victims had urged Judge Sarah Vance to impose stiffer sanctions, and to force BP to apologize. But the judge said she was bound by the terms of the deal between BP and the Justice Department., This case involves only criminal responsibility for the spill. A separate civil trial over clean water act and natural resource damages is set to start in New Orleans February 25.
Take a look at this remarkable graph is it the stock market? Home sales?, Nope. Click on the blue box in the lower right-hand corner and you'll see that the blue line tracks the number of chicken wings that Americans bought at grocery stores over the last year. See that mighty surge of wing-buying in early February? Apparently, you just cannot have a Super Bowl party without chicken wings millions and millions of chicken wings., That bump has gotten bigger and bigger over the years, says Bill Roenigk, chief economist at the National Chicken Council, which represents the chicken industry. And the industry is capitalizing on the craze with both higher prices and enough recipes for baked, fried, or caramelized versions to distract any kitchen referee., Roenigk says the magical pairing of humongous athletes and itty-bitty chicken parts got its start with the rise of sports bars a few decades ago. Sports-watching demands cheap munchies, and wings were both convenient and cheap. Ribs and pizza were the competition, says Roenigk. But ribs cost more money, and pizza well, pizza tends to lose its charm if it sits on a table for too long., Blame sports bars for the chicken wing boom, especially on Super Bowl Sunday., Blame sports bars for the chicken wing boom, especially on Super Bowl Sunday., Three years ago, right before Super Bowl XLV, the National Chicken Council realized that it had a social phenomenon on its hands and decided to promote it. The Council's mock-serious Wing Report is now an annual pre-game tradition., According to the 2013 Wing Report, Americans will eat 1.23 billion wings next weekend. If laid out end to end, they would stretch from Candlestick Park in San Francisco to M&T; Bank Stadium in Baltimore 27 times., In an odd twist, the once-cheap wing has become the most desirable and expensive part of the chicken. Per pound, chicken wings are now pricier than bone-in chicken breasts, perhaps inspiring this epic wing heist., People say, 'You ought to produce more wings,' says Roemigk. This year's Wing Report lays out the crucial obstacle: A chicken has two wings, and chicken companies are not able to produce wings without the rest of the chicken., There's such a demand for wings, Roemigk says, that some restaurants actually are selling strips of chicken breast meat as boneless wings., A chicken's wing actually consists of three parts. Americans eat the first two segments known as the drumette and the flat but the wing tips, known as flippers, are generally exported to Asia, especially China, where they are consumed with gusto. (Chicken feet go across the Pacific, too, in case you were wondering.), But the almighty chicken wing may not hold the Lombardi trophy for long. Others are trying to claim a piece of this lucrative Super Bowl snack market for their own. Taco Bell, for instance, released an ad calling tacos a game day tradition. The ad also laid a helmet-to-helmet hit on the idea of bringing veggies to a party (Secretly, people kind of hate you for it) which aroused the ire of healthy-eating activists and convinced Taco Bell to pull the ad.
Though there have been other signs to indicate that the economy is on the upswing, many Americans aren't feeling all that good about how things are going., The private Conference Board reports that its widely watched consumer confidence index fell to 58.6 in January from 66.7 in December. The index is now the lowest it's been since November 2011., Conference Board economist Lynn Franco says in a statement that consumers are more pessimistic about the economic outlook and, in particular, their financial situation. The increase in the payroll tax has undoubtedly dampened consumers' spirits and it may take a while for confidence to rebound and consumers to recover from their initial paycheck shock., Since consumers buy about 70 percent of all the goods and services that businesses produce, they are critical to the economy's health.
A sign of the times in Boca Raton, Fla. (November 2012 file photo.), A sign of the times in Boca Raton, Fla. (November 2012 file photo.), There's more good news about the housing market this morning., Home prices rose at a faster pace in November in 19 of the 20 major cities where it tracks such data, the latest S&P;/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices report shows:, In 19 cities, prices rose faster in the 12 months to November than in the 12 months to October; Cleveland prices rose at the same pace in both time periods. Phoenix led with the fastest price rise up 22.8% in 12 months as it posted its seventh consecutive month of double-digit annual returns., Economist David Blitzer, who chairs the index committee at S&P; Dow Jones Indices, says in the report that housing is clearly recovering. Prices are rising as are both new and existing home sales., That message echoes a story in today's Washington Post, which reports that the housing sector is an economic bright spot:, The nation's housing market is surging again after years of historic declines, and the unique forces powering its return could last well into 2013., The number of homes for sale is at its lowest level since before the recession, sparking competition among buyers that has led to 10 straight months of price increases. The volume of activity is the highest since 2007., Housing is a key sector of the economy not only because of the related jobs in construction and real estate, but because of the ripple effects as home buyers spend on renovations, appliances, furniture and other goods or services.
Postal rates for domestic first-class mail went up just a penny this week, but for businesses that ship packages internationally like small record labels the rate increases are much larger., Postal rates for domestic first-class mail went up just a penny this week, but for businesses that ship packages internationally like small record labels the rate increases are much larger., Prices on mail sent through the U.S. Postal Service increased this week the price of a first-class stamp now costs 46 cents, up a penny. But for small businesses that ship products overseas, like many independent record labels, the costs could be much larger., Brian Lowit, who has worked at Washington, D.C.'s Dischord Records for 10 years, says that while a postage rate hike is a familiar bump in the road, I've never seen one this drastic., Dischord, the label started and run by Ian MacKaye of the local band Fugazi, has long been known for selling moderately priced records. A copy of Fugazi's 1991 album Steady Diet of Nothing still costs just $10 on CD and $11 on LP. When a customer in Europe or Asia buys a record, though, the label has to add in the cost of shipping. And for those customers, that cost is now much higher., Dischord also distributes releases by many other labels. Lowit says that on Saturday, it cost $13.17 to ship a record to the U.K. Today, it costs him $18.60. For a label that ships several hundred LPs overseas every week, that's a lot of money., Last year, the USPS posted record losses nearly $16 billion and the rate increase is intended to help the agency generate revenue. In a statement earlier this year, Postmaster General Patrick Donahoe said the USPS is currently losing $25 million per day., By law, the Postal Service is only allowed to raise the average price of its services at a rate equal to or less than the rate of inflation, which is currently 2.570 percent. On Sunday morning, rates rose across the board, but the distribution of those increases was different for different services. The cost of postcard and first-class stamps increased by a penny. Domestic first-class packages are up around 3 percent. Express mail went up about 6 percent., The domestic [increase] is real minimal, but I am concerned about the international, says Jeremy Bible, who runs Experimedia, a label, retailer and distributor. Think about everything that goes into the final LP before it gets shipped, he says, from the paper sleeve to the circle glued to the center of the disc: the labels for when they're manufacturing, and supplies, probably even up to the manufacturers such as the pressing plants, who have to have stuff shipped to them., Bible says the biggest hit will be taken by small labels who rely on direct orders from consumers to stay in the black., In some of these cases, the shipping is becoming more expensive than what the people are actually buying, he says. I'm really not sure what the Postal Service is thinking, because they're making people look into other options., The best option for small labels who ship overseas may be to avoid the postal service altogether. Ron Morelli, who runs a record label called L.I.E.S. Records, says he ships a majority of his music internationally via a distributor who has long used a freight shipping company rather than the Postal Service. Morelli says that so far, the price hike hasn't affected him., Other options for labels could include pressing their vinyl overseas, assuming they can find a plant. Or they could do what Jeremy Bible does and ship large amounts of albums before they're purchased to a middle man., Like for the U.K., I have a friend over there, and when we have new releases I send him a large box, so then they'd hold onto the stock and then when they need to fulfill an order for that country, they'd fulfill that, Bible says., Despite these workarounds, he says, rising shipping costs will make selling physical copies of music more difficult.
North Carolina-born Chris Hughes attended Harvard University, where he shared a room with his Facebook co-founder, Mark Zuckerberg. He bought a majority stake in the venerable magazine The New Republic in 2012, and is the magazine's publisher and editor-in-chief., North Carolina-born Chris Hughes attended Harvard University, where he shared a room with his Facebook co-founder, Mark Zuckerberg. He bought a majority stake in the venerable magazine The New Republic in 2012, and is the magazine's publisher and editor-in-chief., Chris Hughes, 29, is the co-founder of Facebook, a former adviser to the Obama campaign, and now the publisher of the 98-year-old magazine The New Republic., He's facing the same challenges other print media owners do: how to marry in-depth news articles with screens that seem to be getting smaller and smaller. Hughes tells NPR's Steve Inskeep it's a task he's prepared to tackle., On redesigning to fit the way we read, The New Republic is known for doing long-form journalism. But we already see over 20 percent of our traffic coming from mobile. So we've redesigned our website so that it's optimized for not only a mobile reading experience, but for the tablet as well. We've added in all kinds of features like cross-device syncing, so that if you start a piece at your desk and you get halfway through it, when you come back to the same article on your phone, it picks you up right where you left off. ... Increasingly, that's the way we read., On why The New Republic will not beat The Huffington Post, The first thing that people tend to do is roll over in the bed, pick up their phone, check their e-mail briefly, and check the headlines. For us, we're not trying to compete with The New York Times or The Huffington Posts of the world to get that first dash of the headlines in the morning. Where you're much more likely to read The New Republic is at lunch, in the evenings, on the weekends the moments when you want to try and go a little bit deeper and get some context and analysis on the journalism of the day., On social media and partisan pushes, We use something called Chartbeat, which shows you how quickly pieces are moving across the social media universe, and that's open in my browser throughout the day. However, it's really important to not be completely guided by the social environment. While it's very important that our pieces move and that people want to share them, I think it might naturally lead towards content that's a little bit more partisan at times; it's more about wit or a quick hit rather than substance. So it's a balance. ... I think the way that social environments work, they tend to reward more extreme opinions. I think they tend to reward images and content that's packaged well. And all of that's important but that doesn't necessarily lead to the best journalism., On finding media sustainability in the digital age, Our model isn't altogether different from the models that magazines used previously. What is different is that it used to be, you give us $35 and we give you 20 issues of print a year. That just isn't gonna cut it in 2013. So now our model is, you give us $35 a year, we give you 20 issues of print, we also give you unlimited access on the Web, we give you audio versions, we give you comments so the business model is much broader, but I also think in time it can be a profitable one. It may not be the same level as media companies made money in the late 20th century, but I think as long as we're focused on a high quality of journalism, then we can get to a point where it's sustainable, if not profitable. It will take some time, but I think we can get there., On why TNR will keep the printing presses going, for now, We make money off of print. And in addition to that, I personally love print. I mean, I tend to read on my phone and my iPad, but on the weekends in particular, I love sitting down with a print magazine and going page by page. So, it makes business sense for us, and it also is something that I love. So we're committed to print for the foreseeable future.
Sun, sand and super cheap downloads., Sun, sand and super cheap downloads., Any day now, you might be able to download Argo, Lincoln and Les Mis for a dime a piece. Microsoft Office could go for a quarter. A song might cost a penny. And it could all be perfectly legal under international law., As part of a long-running trade dispute, the tiny island nation of Antigua and Barbuda (population: 90,000) won the right to use the intellectual property of U.S. firms without having to pay any royalties or licensing fees., At a meeting in Geneva today, the country got the final go ahead from the World Trade Organization., The fight goes back to the 1990s, when a bunch of online casinos set up shop in Antigua. After the U.S. cracked down on the casinos, Antigua complained to the WTO, arguing that the U.S. was unfairly protecting its domestic casinos in violation of free trade rules., Antigua won the case. Typically, when a country wins a case at the WTO, it wins the right to, say, put a tariff on goods from the losing country. But Antigua is so small that tariffs wouldn't have any noticeable effect on the U.S. economy., So Antigua took another route: It asked the WTO to recover damages in the form of intellectual property, and the WTO said yes. If this seems likely to cause harm to innocents who had nothing to do with the fight over online casinos, that's the whole point., It's so Bill Gates might ring up Obama and say, 'Why have I lost my copyright so you can protect gaming?' Mark Mendel, the lawyer representing Antigua told me. (By gaming, Mendel means the U.S. casino business.), To be clear, the Bill Gates reference was hypothetical. Antigua has not yet said what it plans to sell or how it plans to sell it. And whatever it sells, it's not going to be able to sell all that much of it. The WTO said Antigua can collect only about $21 million a year in damages., In fact, Mendel says, Antigua really doesn't want to do this at all. What it wants is to cut some kind of deal directly with the U.S. that would revive the country's online gambling industry, or help create some other industry in its place., Antigua is still a very limited economy, Mendel said., As recently as Friday, the U.S. and Antigua were still talking about settlement options, Nkenge Harmon, a spokeswoman for the U.S. government, told me in an email. And, she wrote:, ...if Antigua does proceed with the unprecedented plan for its government to authorize the theft of intellectual property, it would only serve to hurt Antigua's own interests. Government-authorized piracy would undermine chances for a settlement. It also would serve as a major impediment to foreign investment in the Antiguan economy, particularly in high-tech industries.
Vehicles in the lot of a Northbrook, Ill., Toyota dealer last October., Vehicles in the lot of a Northbrook, Ill., Toyota dealer last October., After seeing its sales take a hit in 2011 because production was hurt by the earthquake and tsunami that struck Japan early that year, Toyota bounced back in 2012 to retake the No. 1 spot as the world's top automaker., The company sold 9.75 million vehicles, to No. 2 General Motors' 9.3 million. Volkswagen was No. 3, with 9.1 million vehicles sold., Among the reasons Toyota is back atop the sales statistics: Strong demand for its Prius family of hybrid cars, sedans like the Camry and SUVs such as the Lexus RX 350, MarketWatch writes., Now, thanks to a weaker yen that is helping make its products less expensive in the key U.S. market, Toyota is forecasting another gain in 2013 to sales of 9.9 million. BloombergBusinessweek says some of Toyota's good fortune will come at the expense of South Korea's automakers, who are getting hurt by a rising South Korean won that makes their vehicles relatively more expensive., USA Today notes that GM had been the top-selling automaker for more than seven decades before losing the title to Toyota in 2008., CNNMoney adds one footnote to the Toyota-GM rivalry:, Toyota's sales totals were also helped by the fact that it made more than 600,000 heavy-duty trucks and buses during the year, a segment GM essentially pulled out of in 2009.
Traders on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange on Monday., Traders on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange on Monday., Almost as surely as the sun rises in the east, stories about the stock market hitting new highs are sure to be followed by declines in key indexes., As Reuters writes, the S&P; 500 on Friday closed at its highest since December 10, 2007, and the Dow ended at its highest since October 31, 2007. Those dates are significant: Officially, the U.S. economy slipped into recession in December 2007 (it officially emerged from recession in June 2009). So it could now be said that the market was back to its pre-recession levels., But in early trading today, as Bloomberg News reports, U.S. stocks fell, following the longest rally for the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 Index since 2004, after a report showed pending home sales declined., It's something of a truism in the news media: once everyone notices something happening, it's time for things to reverse., Still, according to The Financial Times there is reason to think the market will continue its rally:, Money has started flowing back into equities, suggesting the past five years of outflows from mutual funds may finally end this year and affirming the sense that 2013 may be the start of the 'Great Rotation' out of bonds into stocks., Underlining that theme, corporate earnings, while not spectacular, are doing better than forecast. ... Stepping back, the macro picture is also brightening with the eurozone firmly in remission from its debt crisis. China is reporting stronger growth while Japan, the world's third-largest economy, finally appears serious about reversing decades of lackluster performance. ..., So for a host of reasons, the performance of equities may have further room to run with the S&P;'s record peak from 2007 in sight., The S&P; 500 hit its all-time high of 1,565.15 on Oct. 9, 2007. At midday Monday, it was trading around 1,502. We'll watch to see how things finish today.
Subaru, known for its success in Denver, the Pacific Northwest and the Northeast, aims to expand its market to Texas and Tennessee., Subaru, known for its success in Denver, the Pacific Northwest and the Northeast, aims to expand its market to Texas and Tennessee., The car market in the U.S. is at its most competitive. Not only are big companies like General Motors and Toyota slugging it out, but in order to survive, small-niche players like Subaru also are trying to push into the mainstream., The Japanese carmaker is popular in Denver, the Pacific Northwest and the Northeast. Now Subaru has its sights on Texas and Tennessee., The comedy show Portlandia pokes fun at all things Portland, Oregon's famously liberal city. In one sketch, two characters, both driving Subarus, meet at a four-way stop. No, you go, they repeatedly urge each other in an absurd standoff of politeness., The fact that they're driving Subarus is part of the joke, but that's not some idle stereotype., No, you go., Because most Subaru models are all-wheel drive, they're particularly popular in places where the weather can be dicey, like the Northeast or the Pacific Northwest., An Opportunity In Texas, If you're No. 4 in Portland and you're No. 20 in Texas, probably the opportunity is in Texas, says Michael McHale with Subaru., He says the company had to be more ambitious and rethink the U.S. market. Sometimes we look at the differences around the country. ... But underlying all of that, there are still basic human truths, McHale says., Not only did the company think about the country differently; it started to sell in a different way by beefing up distribution and dealerships., Jessica Caldwell, senior analyst and director of pricing and industry analysis at edmunds.com, says Subaru had a strange problem: Its cars were almost too good and its customers were too loyal., I think they have a core, loyal following and you would never want to get rid of that ... but at the same time, they keep their cars for a long time and you can't have people keeping their cars for a decade or more when you want to sell new cars, she says., Success In A Conventional Look, Caldwell says the company tried to expand sales to the middle of the country by making its cars wider, rounder, less boxy, more conventional looking and more fuel efficient., It worked., During the economic downturn, when other car companies' sales were declining, Subaru's increased by a third and it began building more of its cars in the U.S., &ldquo; They don't have to be everything to everyone; they have to be something to someone., - Jake Fisher, director of auto testing at Consumer Reports, It's one of the fastest growing car companies, with its biggest growth markets in Houston, Dallas and Florida., Jake Fisher, director of auto testing at Consumer Reports, says Subaru can serve as an example for other carmakers looking to grow. They've kind of taken this slow, systematic approach and just really concentrated on what they needed to do to be competitive in the market, he says., Subaru has solidified its place in the American market, but Fisher says it'll probably never be as big as Toyota or Ford., I don't think they have to be a Toyota; they don't have to be everyone else. They don't have to be everything to everyone; they have to be something to someone, he says., Subaru's McHale says, If you're buying a big truck in Texas, keep buying the truck we're not the brand for you. But if you're looking for an all-wheel-drive vehicle that you can throw the dog in the back, the skis on the roof and go in the mountains on the weekend, I think they have some nice hills in Tennessee, too., McHale says Subaru has conquered Portland, Ore., and Portland, Maine, and now it's on to the Portlands in Texas, Michigan and Tennessee.
Hemp products for sale in Washington, D.C., in 2010. The U.S. is the world's largest consumer of hemp products, although growing hemp is illegal under federal law. Colorado recently passed a measure that legalizes growing hemp., Hemp products for sale in Washington, D.C., in 2010. The U.S. is the world's largest consumer of hemp products, although growing hemp is illegal under federal law. Colorado recently passed a measure that legalizes growing hemp., With recreational marijuana now legal in Colorado, small-scale pot shops will open up soon in places like Denver and Boulder. But that's not the only business that could get a boost: Large-scale commercial farmers may also be in line to benefit., Why? When Colorado voters legalized marijuana last November, they also legalized hemp., As plants, marijuana and hemp look related, and they are. But while marijuana is bred to get its users high, hemp is all business grown for food and other everyday uses. Hemp contains very little of the chemical THC, the active ingredient in pot., That might be news to farmer Michael Bowman's neighbors. When they hear that we're growing hemp, they think we're growing marijuana, he says., Bowman is from Wray, a small town on the eastern Colorado plains. He thinks hemp needs some rehabilitation and that he's the man to do it., A Wonder Crop?, Bowman will plant 100 acres of hemp this spring on his 3,000-acre farm, where the winter wind now whips across barren wheat and corn fields., DEA Special Agent Paul Roach says federal law does not distinguish between hemp and marijuana., We think 100 acres is a good number, he says. It's not a garden plot, and it's enough to have enough product at the end of the day that we can do something real with it., To hear him and other activists tell it, hemp can be used to make just about anything: rope, paper, plastic, clothing, shoe polish, car parts and even dog chew toys to name just a few of the possibilities., Bowman says he'll turn his first crop into an edible oil. Our goal is really to try to understand: Is this a viable crop? Getting the research and data gathered this year will be a good step one, he says., When asked if it's a political experiment as much as an agricultural one, Bowman says: It's probably more of a political experiment at this point., A Growing Trend, In the eyes of the federal government, growing cannabis is a violation of the Controlled Substances Act. Special Agent Paul Roach of the Drug Enforcement Administration says federal law does not distinguish between hemp and marijuana., It really doesn't matter whether it looks different or it looks the same, he says. If it's the cannabis plant, it's in the Controlled Substances Act and, therefore, enforceable under federal drug law., The Department of Justice says it's reviewing the legalization initiatives approved in Colorado and in Washington state. For now, the United States is the only industrialized country that bans hemp., Yet it's also the world's largest consumer of hemp products. According to an industry association, total sales of products containing hemp are estimated to be around $450 million., Hemp's trendy, says Frank Peters, who works in the health and beauty department at a Whole Foods in Boulder, Colo. In this section, you could throw a hemp seed in any direction and hit a product made with the stuff: soaps and lotions, oils and protein powders. And there's a new product on the shelf called Hemp Hearts., Hemp Hearts are the partially shelled seed, Peters explains, which is going to be the more nutritional part of the plant., And what do people do with Hemp Hearts? They eat it. They're going to put it in yogurt, over cereal. You can bake with it, things like that, he says., Peters says it tastes just like any seed. It's not really strong one way or another, he says., Its taste may be rather bland, but its politics are anything but. The Colorado Legislature is giving itself until July 2014 to decide how to regulate hemp.
The Barclays Center in New York, the new home of the Brooklyn Nets, was built partially with investment from overseas donors seeking U.S. citizenship. A little-known immigration program allows wealthy investors to get a green card in exchange for funding American businesses., The Barclays Center in New York, the new home of the Brooklyn Nets, was built partially with investment from overseas donors seeking U.S. citizenship. A little-known immigration program allows wealthy investors to get a green card in exchange for funding American businesses., The traditional immigrant story is a familiar one., Someone who longs for a better life makes the tough journey, leaves behind the hardships of his or her native land and comes to the United States to start again. That story, in a lot of ways, helped build this country., These days, however, there's a very different kind of immigrant who wants to come to this country the rich and they have a different set of dreams., Anthony Korda was a barrister, or lawyer, in England who vacationed frequently in the U.S. with his family., Each time we left the nice weather of Florida, we were more depressed about having to leave, Korda tells NPR's Robert Smith., Korda says they did not look forward to slogging through the London rain, so he made a lifestyle choice: He was going to immigrate to the U.S. and live in a place where you could get a real tan., Korda found pretty quickly, though, that the last thing the U.S. needed was more lawyers, so a standard or employment-based visa was unlikely. But then he saw a shortcut to becoming an American in a small, obscure federal program called EB-5, designed for people like him to get into the country if they had enough money., It looked too good to be true, he says., All Korda had to do was cash out most of his savings about $500,000 and invest in an American business. If he could help create 10 jobs, then he would get a green card., Korda's investment was a ski resort in Vermont that was looking to improve its infrastructure. So he put down his money and got to move to Florida and vacation in Vermont. He and his family got the American dream, but what did America get in return?, A Path For Rich Immigrants, The immigration program for the rich was designed to provide a boost to the U.S. economy, and it costs very little to give out the visas. The program allows 10,000 people a year to immigrate using the investment method. It's never reached that limit, but it is getting more popular every year. In 2012, about 7,600 made use of the program., Some of those dollars are going to the Barclay's Center, the new home of the NBA's Brooklyn Nets., Bloomberg News reports that more than $200 million of the loans to build the arena came from foreigners who were using the investment to get into the U.S. The business plan predicts that in the end, it will create more than 5,000 jobs., That's how it's supposed to work, but often the projects funded by the EB-5 visas are not quite as glamorous., David North, a fellow at the Center for Immigration Studies, says the government's rules for these visas encourage investment in depressed areas, rural places and inner cities. These are places where private investment is scarce and often risky., The investments that are open to an EB-5 investor are really rock-bottom, marginal investments, North says. These are essentially small, usually real estate investments of some kind [and] small construction investments., North says one of the other problems with the rules is that the investors have very few responsibilities to make sure the project works., We're not bringing entrepreneurs to this country in this program, he says, we're bringing passive investors., Economic Or Immigration Program?, The federal government doesn't release numbers to show how many of the investments succeed or fail. Dune Lawrence, an investigative reporter with Bloomberg News, has tried to figure it out. She tells NPR's Smith that the program has several problems., The basic problem starts with the fact that it's an economic development program run by an immigration agency, Lawrence says. The immigration agency is focused on immigration., That focus by the agency, of handling the applications and paperwork concerned with the investor's immigration status, makes it unprepared to handle the economic side of the program, Lawrence says., The only data released by the government is how many green cards were issued through the program, she says, which doesn't tell you how many investments actually succeeded in the long term., It's all based on the economic assumptions that were made at the beginning of the project, she says, and if they can show that they're in the process of spending the money then that's that., Despite all the questions, defenders of the program say that money is money. Maybe some rich foreigners could lose their stake and perhaps some won't create the right number of jobs, but it is a real if relatively tiny bump in investment in U.S. businesses., Mark Jones, a political science professor at Rice University in Texas, says that overall he thinks the program is good for the economy., It is bringing in money ... and investment to the United States that otherwise might not have come here, he says., Jones says just as you can find anecdotal evidence of failure, you can find a bunch of examples of successful projects funded with foreign investment. In Texas, he's looked at successful strip malls, horse-racing enterprises and real estate projects funded by immigrants that seem to be working., Korda, the lawyer who wanted to live on the beach, says he has seen only a modest return on his investment in the ski resort, between 1.5 and 2 percent., Though he could have done much better in the stock market or bonds, the tradeoff for Korda is he's now living in Florida instead of London. He now consults with other wealthy foreigners wanting to use the program to come to America.
In this Oct. 20, 2012 photo, people line up to enter a newly opened Apple Store in Beijing. Exxon has once again surpassed Apple as the world's most valuable company after the iPhone and iPad maker saw its stock price falter., In this Oct. 20, 2012 photo, people line up to enter a newly opened Apple Store in Beijing. Exxon has once again surpassed Apple as the world's most valuable company after the iPhone and iPad maker saw its stock price falter., Apple stock has dropped sharply since it announced earnings that disappointed analysts. Now the tech tastemaker is paying another price, losing its crown as the world's most valuable company to Exxon Mobil., Exxon's market capitalization, the total value of its outstanding stock, was about $417 billion Friday. Apple's was about $413 billion., The move comes exactly one year after Apple previously surpassed Exxon on its road to most valuable U.S. company of all-time, The Wall Street Journal notes. Apple's slide has been fast and furious. The gap between Apple and Exxon widened to as much as $240 billion in September. ... Since then, Apple shares have slid more than 35%., On Thursday alone, Apple's stock sank more than 12 percent, to $450.50 per share. Early Friday afternoon, it was down an additional 2.6 percent., Apple's stock price peaked in September at $705.07 on the day the iPhone 5 was released, the Associated Press said. Exxon, in the meantime, has been trading steady. Its business oil seems less prone to stock market ups and downs than the Cupertino, Calif.-based tech darling., For a long while, Apple seemed it could do no wrong, selling millions of iPhones and iPads and growing its profits along with those sales. But while its sales remain strong, Apple's market share in the smartphone and tablet markets has slipped amid strong competition from Samsung and other rivals., Bloomberg News says at least 20 analysts lowered their projections for Apple's stock after the company reported slower growth on Wednesday. Abhey Lamba, an analyst at Mizuho Securities USA, told Bloomberg: This is a big shift in the company's position from a year ago. The growth has slowed down much faster than we anticipated., AAPL Market Cap data by YCharts, Apple's stock took a hit after unconfirmed reports that it was cutting orders to iPhone suppliers, indicating that demand was weakening. Others were concerned by CEO Tim Cook's remarks during the Wednesday conference call, when he indicated Apple would not reconsider the iPhone's smaller 3.5- and 4-inch screen size at a time when many fast-selling smartphones offer larger screens, the San Jose Mercury News reported., But the biggest question analysts have for Apple is, what have you done lately?, It has been nearly three years since a new product has come from a company still seen as the embodiment of innovation, the AP writes. That last product, the iPad, came in 2010, when its CEO Steve Jobs was still alive. Some analysts question whether Apple can keep growing by just releasing new versions of its old products. The long-rumored Apple TV, is still just that, a rumor., (Avie Schneider is NPR.org's business editor.)
A sold sign outside a home under construction last fall in Peoria, Ill., A sold sign outside a home under construction last fall in Peoria, Ill., Though there was a 7.3 percent drop in sales of new homes in December from November, sales were up a healthy 8.8 percent from December 2011, the Census Bureau and Department of Housing and Urban Development report., Homes sold at a annual rate of 369,000 last month., Over the whole year, the agencies estimate, there were 367,000 new homes sold up 19.9 percent from the 306,000 sold in 2011., Reuters says that despite the dip in December from November, housing still appears set to be a bright spot in the country's economic recovery. And, it notes that:, Government data for new home sales are subject to substantial revisions. Indeed, the Commerce Department raised its estimate for sales in November by 22,000 to a 398,000-unit rate, making the pace of sales in November the fastest since April 2010.
A scene from 99% The Occupy Wall Street Collaborative Film, a Sundance documentary that raised more than $23,000 on Kickstarter., A scene from 99% The Occupy Wall Street Collaborative Film, a Sundance documentary that raised more than $23,000 on Kickstarter., If you want to make a movie, you generally need a lot of money. And filmmakers have to be creative about raising it., Just ask the filmmakers at the Sundance Film Festival, taking place this week in Park City, Utah. Some 10 percent of the films selected for this year's iteration of the prestigious festival raised money through the crowd-funding website Kickstarter., In the three years since the website launched, Kickstarter-funded films have been nominated for Oscars, picked up by Showtime and HBO, and honored with awards at Sundance, South By Southwest and Cannes., Kickstarter is used by artists in every discipline, but film is its biggest category. And, as one Kickstarter employee put it, filmmakers are natural hustlers., Just check out the videos they make to get you to give them money. There's the you-get-stuff pitch. There's the humorous, feel-sorry-for-us pitch. There's even a pitch from people who you'd think already have the money, like Whoopi Goldberg., And those campaigns are successful. Goldberg raised over $73,000 for a documentary about the comedian Moms Mabley. Another Kickstarter-funded documentary, Detropia, was recently short-listed for an Oscar., According to Kickstarter, more than $100 million has been pledged to films on the site., We quickly began to realize that this was something really capturing people's attention and excitement, and allowing people to connect with creative endeavors [something] that was sort of transformational, says Keri Putnam, executive director of the Sundance Institute., When Sundance supports a film, it's highlighted on a special page on Kickstarter. They can make more money through Kickstarter than they can through a Sundance grant, Putnam says., Sometimes filmmakers can nab a lot more, especially if they're already artists with a track record. Charlie Kaufman wrote the movies Being John Malkovich and Adaptation. He and the animation company Starburns Industries ran a Kickstarter campaign to raise money for a film based on his play, Anomalisa., In their recorded campaign pitch on the site, they said they hoped to make the film without the interference of the typical big studio process., They raised more than $400,000. Yancey Strickler, co-founder of Kickstarter, says Kaufman and the animators are the kind of artists who use the site because Hollywood isn't working for them., They're always butting up against a system that has different ideas about how art should work, Strickler says. But yet, they have huge fan bases. Here, they're able to go directly to those audiences and make something the way they wanted to., Cultivating that fan base is turning out to be another major benefit for filmmakers who run successful Kickstarter campaigns. In raising cash for a project, they also raise awareness, which could result in a bigger audience for their film once it's released., The people who pledge are called backers. Filmmaker Audrey Ewell is premiering a documentary, 99% The Occupy Wall Street Collaborative Film, at this year's Sundance Festival. She says Kickstarter calls the effort a campaign for a reason. She raised more than $23,000 from hundreds of backers., These are the people who are becoming the community that's going to support you, so it's important to involve them, Ewell says. Encourage everybody to reach out for you on your behalf.
Mary Jo White, then U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York, speaks during a May 2001 press conference following guilty verdicts in the trial of four followers of Osama bin Laden that bombed two U.S. embassies in East Africa in 1998. President Obama intends to nominate White to head the Securities and Exchange Commission., Mary Jo White, then U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of New York, speaks during a May 2001 press conference following guilty verdicts in the trial of four followers of Osama bin Laden that bombed two U.S. embassies in East Africa in 1998. President Obama intends to nominate White to head the Securities and Exchange Commission., President Obama's choice to head the Securities and Exchange Commission has prosecuted terrorists and mobsters. If she's confirmed, Mary Jo White's next challenge will be tackling reckless behavior on Wall Street., White, who spent nearly a decade as U.S. Attorney in New York City, would be the first former prosecutor to lead the SEC. She oversaw successful prosecutions in the 1993 World Trade Center bombing and against mafia boss John Gotti, as well as numerous white-collar criminals. The White House highlighted that background in an apparent signal to would-be wrongdoers in the financial sector., Since she was such a tough prosecutor, and had an unwaving interest of extracting pretty good sanctions against individuals, it would be part of her DNA to expect that she'd want to see more individuals prosecuted, says James Cox, an expert in securities law at Duke University. Whether it's going to be successful (depends) on the political climate of the SEC and the ability to change an agency culture., Unlike the U.S. Attorney's office, the SEC prosecutes only civil cases, not criminal ones. Most of its cases end in settlements, often with no admission of wrongdoing., Unfortunately, the culture that's developed at the SEC over the last 15 to 20 years is a body-count process, Cox says, with a focus on settling a large number of cases, rather than individual penalties that might serve as a greater deterrent., The Obama administration says by nominating White, the president is showing his commitment to enforcing rules of the road on Wall Street. Many of those rules are still being written. The SEC is responsible for drafting rules to implement key parts of the 2 1/2-year-old law passed in response to the financial crisis., When the president signed the financial reform law, that was half-time, says Scott Talbott of the Financial Services Roundtable, an industry trade group. The legislators left the field and now it's time for the regulators to take over. And we are about halfway through the third quarter of implementation of a 2,000-page law., Financial firms have challenged the so-called Volcker Rule, which limits banks' ability to trade on their own behalf, as well as separate regulations designed to safeguard money market accounts., There is a tendency following a crisis to over-regulate, Talbott says. The pendulum rarely stops at the bottom. So we want to see that we don't over-regulate here., Since leaving the U.S. Attorney's office in 2002, White has served as a director of the Nasdaq stock exchange and also defended clients accused of financial fraud. She has fewer ties to Wall Street than some earlier SEC leaders, which could be a political advantage., Unfortunately, investor groups don't have the same influence on the Hill as does Wall Street, Cox said., The president also re-nominated Richard Cordray as director of the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, a new agency designed to protect people from risky financial products. Last year, Obama used a recess appointment to install Cordray in the post over Republican opposition. The recess appointment expires at the end of this year.
Mary Jo White, who President Obama wants to lead the Securities and Exchange Commission., Mary Jo White, who President Obama wants to lead the Securities and Exchange Commission., Mary Jo White, a former U.S. attorney in New York who prosecuted terrorists responsible for the bombings of the World Trade Center and U.S. embassies in Africa, will be nominated by President Obama to head the Securities and Exchange Commission., NPR's Scott Horsley gets that word from a senior White House official. Other news outlets are being told the same thing. The president is expected to make the announcement this afternoon. White would succeed Mary Schapiro, who stepped down last month., White was U.S. attorney for the Southern District of New York for nine years, until January 2002. That year, she joined the New York-based law firm Debevoise &amp; Plimpton. She has been a director of the Nasdaq Stock Exchange., Obama is also expected to say he will renominate Richard Cordray to lead the newly created Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. Last January, Obama used a recess appointment to put Cordray in that job while the Senate was on vacation. Republicans had been trying to block Cordray's appointment., Update at 10:43 a.m. ET:, The SEC plays an essential role in the implementation of Wall Street reform and rooting out reckless behavior in the financial industry, and White's background in enforcement and record of success make her the perfect choice to lead the agency at this important time, a White House official said., Bloomberg noted that White's nomination is a departure for the agency, because it has tended to be run by lawyers steeped in financial policy making and the securities industry., Her nomination could signal a move to get tougher on Wall Street, The Wall Street Journal reported. It also could help quiet criticism that Mr. Obama isn't putting enough women or minorities in key posts in his second term. The SEC chairman, who leads an independent agency, isn't a member of the president's cabinet, but the post is a key link between Washington and the nation's financial markets, hedge funds and banks., White's husband, John W. White, is an SEC veteran, The New York Times notes. From 2006 through 2008, he was head of the S.E.C.'s division of corporation finance, which oversees public companies' disclosures and reporting, the Times said.
The number of first-time claims for unemployment insurance dipped by 5,000 last week from the week before, to 330,000, the Employment and Training Administration reports., That means claims remain at a low level not seen since January 2008., Another measure, the 4-week moving average that is supposed to give a broader look at the trend, declined by 8,250 to 351,750., Bloomberg News cautions that the claims figures may be affected by challenges in adjusting the data for swings at the start of a year.
Hurricane Betsy hit the Gulf Coast in 1965., There's a quick, one-word explanation for why the federal government started selling flood insurance: Betsy., Hurricane Betsy, which struck the Gulf Coast in 1965, became known as billion-dollar Betsy. Homes were ruined. Water up to the roofs. People paddling around streets in boats. Massive damage., This would be the time when you'd expect people to be pulling out their flood insurance policies. But flood insurance was hard to come by. You could get fire insurance, theft insurance, car insurance, life insurance. Not flood., There was a lack of data, says Eric Smith, president and CEO of Swiss Re in the Americas. One of the bedrock principles of insurance is it has to be something that's somewhat measurable. You have be able to calculate its frequency, its severity. How often this going to occur and how much damage is it going to do?, A few years after Betsy, in 1968, the government decided it would take on the job of selling flood insurance. Some people hated this idea. If private insurance companies wouldn't sell policies to people who wanted to live in flood zones, they argued, why should the government?, This argument did not win the day. The government created flood maps, gathered data, and set up the National Flood Insurance Program., I think it generally worked out OK overall, until Katrina, says Mark Browne, a professor of risk management and insurance at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. Katrina was a major loss for the National Flood Insurance Program. It blew through its money and went into deficit., This is why flood insurance is a tricky business. You can have a quiet three decades, then a huge hurricane plows into a major city. Suddenly you're back in the red., Over the past few years, the National Flood Insurance Program has had to borrow $17 billion from the government., So were the critics right? Is the government running a bad business? Maybe not. After a big national disaster, Browne argues, the government is on the hook anyway. It might as well collect some money by selling insurance., The head of the National Flood Insurance Program says the program plans to repay the money it borrowed from the government but it may take 20 or 30 years to do so.
National Transportation Safety Board investigators inspect a Boeing 787 Dreamliner at Japan's Takamatsu Airport. A Federal Aviation Administration investigation into the plane's troubles has widened into a review of the agency's certification process for new airliners., National Transportation Safety Board investigators inspect a Boeing 787 Dreamliner at Japan's Takamatsu Airport. A Federal Aviation Administration investigation into the plane's troubles has widened into a review of the agency's certification process for new airliners., One week after Federal Aviation Administration officials grounded Boeing's newest jet, the world's entire 787 Dreamliner fleet remains parked. FAA Administrator Michael Huerta said Tuesday he couldn't speculate on when a review of the plane would be complete., Investigators in the U.S. and Japan remain perplexed as to why batteries on two planes suffered serious failures. Now Boeing, its flagship jet and the certification process for the 787 are under intense scrutiny., Everyone working on the 787 knew that lithium-ion batteries, which pack an enormous amount of power into a small package, require special care. While the batteries have a history of fires, Boeing and government regulators thought they had the battery issues under control., But earlier this month, a battery on a brand-new Japan Air Lines 787 caught fire. Less than 48 hours later, a battery on an All Nippon Airways 787 overheated and sustained major damage, forcing the pilot to make an emergency landing., An Outsourced Plane, John Goglia, a former member of the National Transportation Safety Board, says investigators must look at several things as they try to assess the source of the plane's problems., First, he says, is determining if there is a design or manufacturing defect in the batteries themselves. In the case of the two problem batteries, it appears they may have come from the same production batch., Goglia says investigators are looking at other parts of the electrical system as well., They're looking at the battery charger, the circuitry and the protections the charging system has, and they're looking at the electronics system in general of the airplane, he says, because it could be possible that additional current was coming in from another source on the airplane., Boeing outsourced the design, engineering and production of the Dreamliner to an unprecedented degree 65 percent of the plane is not made by Boeing. The batteries were made by a Japanese company, as part of the electrical system supplied by a French firm., It's always a difficult challenge to ensure that subcontractors are implementing the same high standards for quality assurance and quality control in their individual components, says attorney Kenneth Quinn, former chief counsel for the FAA., Relying On Manufacturers For Testing, There's another quality issue under new scrutiny: the FAA's certification process itself. While there is no evidence that the recent 787 incidents can be linked to insufficient oversight, the problems have left some asking precisely how the approval process works., The FAA is responsible for certifying new planes, but the agency is chronically understaffed and, to some extent, lacking expertise in some of the latest technologies. That leaves the agency heavily reliant on manufacturers like Boeing., The thing that people don't understand is the FAA does not generate any of the data for any airplane that's certificated, explains John McGraw, a former deputy director of flight standards at the FAA. It's all generated by the manufacturer., McGraw, now an aviation consultant, says that certain Boeing employees are allowed to sign off on some performance tests on behalf of the FAA., While the idea of delegating certain tests to manufacturers has been around for decades, the companies have been given more authority since 2005. But much of that delegated responsibility, McGraw says, is relatively routine work., The more cutting-edge, latest technology, systems and items are reserved for the FAA to actually get involved with, he says., The Dreamliner's battery falls into that category. Overall, the FAA says its technical experts logged some 200,000 hours testing and reviewing the plane's design., The FAA is now conducting a high-level review of the 787's electrical system and its own role in certifying the new jet., Meanwhile, Boeing continues to produce the 787s, but is not delivering any new ones.
People walk past a closed business affected by Hurricane Sandy in the heavily damaged South Street Seaport in New York City in December., People walk past a closed business affected by Hurricane Sandy in the heavily damaged South Street Seaport in New York City in December., When compared with its neighbors Coney Island and the Rockaways, Manhattan seemed hardly touched by the waters and winds of Superstorm Sandy in late October. But almost three months later, areas of lower Manhattan are still laboring to recover., Earlier this month, a museum devastated by Sandy finally reopened. About 800 people packed the lobby and upstairs galleries of the South Street Seaport Museum in lower Manhattan as Mayor Michael Bloomberg addressed the crowd., The best days are yet ahead, he said, pulling out various sailing references. We did not crash on the shoals, and the river finally went down. God bless, let's all get back to work., From an outsider's perspective, the crowd reflected a vibrant, active neighborhood. But with the exception of the museum, every single store on the block of Fulton Street is closed and boarded up. Even the museum is limping along., Sandy swept up to 6 feet of water from the East River to the museum lobby, taking out the elevators, escalator, and heating and air conditioning units., But the worst of everything is that the basement was completely submerged in water, and that is where all of our electrical equipment comes in and the water pumps, says Jerry Gallagher, the museum's general manager., The museum, he says, was able to reopen because of temporary heaters powered by kerosene on the back of the building., Struggling Stores, At night, the hum of generators is a now-familiar sound for passersby on neighboring streets. A few blocks from the museum, the Bowne &amp; Co. print shop is one of the businesses that's open. It's a glorious space, filled with 19th century presses, handprinted stationary, and shelves of wooden and metal type., Master printer Robert Warner has his foot on the treadle of a press from 1901, printing cards with the simple word love for Valentine's Day. There is nothing quite like the smell of the ink and the sound of a 19th century machine at work, he says., The company was founded in 1775, around the time of the American Revolution, making it New York City's oldest company that operates with the same name, Warner says. It survived The Revolution and the Sept. 11 attacks, but almost ended with Sandy., About 200 cases of type were submerged, prompting about 100 volunteers to help dry everything out much of it very old, rare, wooden type., We had people cleaning every individual letter, says Ali Osborn, a printer with the shop. And they all had to dry, and, of course, that was hard because we had no power or electricity for a couple of weeks., Some stores still don't have power or phones. Verizon is replacing copper wire damaged by Sandy with fiber-optic cable, a job that may take months., Many stores are also still relying on cash-only sales. The Downtown Alliance, which manages the business improvement district for lower Manhattan, gave out nearly 100 of the little attachments that transform smartphones into credit card machines., Quiet, Emptier Streets, Marco Pasanella, a local vintner, says most Manhattan residents don't have a clue about their home's rocky condition., Friends of mine who live even five or six blocks away can't really believe it, he says. And then they come down to the neighborhood and they say, 'It really looks like a disaster area.' , Pasanella is the owner of Pasanella &amp; Son, a beautiful wine store on South Street. He says 10,000 bottles of wine were floating around the day after Sandy hit., The water rose up to 6 1/2 feet in the store, forcing Pasanella to spend six figures on renovations. But he turned the place around in a quick three weeks. The holiday season can be 60 percent of your year, Pasanella says. That helped motivate us., Almost three months after Sandy, his place is the only one open on the block. Outside, Pasanella points at a closed corner restaurant, The Paris Cafe., A favorite hangout of Thomas Edison, among others, he says. He motions up. Above the cafe are 17 apartments, all empty., Con Edison, a New York City energy supplier, says 22 large buildings are still without power, or on only partial power, as well as some smaller ones. That makes tough times for small businesses like Pasanella &amp; Son., With no neighbors, nobody nearby, there is no one to buy wine, Pasanella says. This was a whole neighborhood; it's dark outside and very quiet. It's eerie., Slowly, more tourists have begun visiting the area. The Downtown Alliance says more than 87 percent of lower Manhattan businesses were up and running by the first of the year., Still, some stores are barely holding on financially and may not open until late spring.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics says union membership continues to decline in the United States., In 2012, American Union membership rate dropped to 11.3 percent from 11.8 percent in 2011. As The Washington Post reports, that's the lowest level since the 1930s., The BLS says that in 1983, the first year comparable data was available, the union membership rate was at 20.1 percent., The Post adds:, Total membership fell by about 400,000 workers to 14.4 million. More than half the loss about 234,000 came from government workers including teachers, firefighters and public administrators., The losses add another blow to a labor movement already stretched thin by fighting efforts in states like Wisconsin, Indiana and Michigan to curb bargaining rights and weaken union clout., But unions also saw losses in the private sector, even as the economy expanded modestly., In a statement, Richard Trumka, the president of the AFL-CIO aknowledged the decline saying the sad truth is that nowadays it is harder for the working class to have a voice on the job., Collective action through unions remains the single best way for working people to effect change, Trumka went on. But our still-struggling economy, weak laws and political as well as ideological assaults have taken a toll on union membership, and in the process have also imperiled economic security and good, middle class jobs., The Los Angeles Times reports that the drop in union membership comes at a critical time: Wal-Mart and other companies have begun talking about bringing manufacturing jobs back to the United States., The Times continues:, New manufacturing jobs in the United States usually are not unionized, and traditionally pay much less than traditional manufacturing jobs did. When Suarez Corp. Industries, for example, moved its manufacturing of space heaters from China to North Canton, Ohio, a company executive said employees would make $7.50 to $14 per hour. Former employees in the same facility, which made Hoover products until the plant moved to Mexico, made $20 an hour.
Fresh snow lures a lot of people to do some outdoor exploring, but sometimes that exploring can go too far. When snowmobilers or skiers wander off or get in over their heads, many call 911, putting a strain on already underfunded search-and-rescue budgets., Some states can bill skiers for search-and-rescue efforts. Often, those who need rescuing wandered into out-of-bounds areas and couldn't find their way back., Some states can bill skiers for search-and-rescue efforts. Often, those who need rescuing wandered into out-of-bounds areas and couldn't find their way back., In Vermont, state police have had to help find 50 lost skiers in the past four weeks., At the Killington resort in Vermont, snowboarders are checking out an expert run on the summit, watching others hit the white powder. These folks may not be troublemakers, but there are riders who go looking for fun in all the wrong places., Out Of Safety And Into Harm, Bob Giolito, a former Killington ski patroller who is now part of the state police, points to an unmarked trail into the woods. It's almost moguled up, he says. You see all the ski tracks? There's high volume of people coming through here. , Areas like these aren't quite accessible. There's a bright orange rope that a person would have to duck under, and several big signs say Out of Bonds and No Skiing Beyond This Point. Despite all that, Giolito says, an alarming number of ill-equipped skiers keep trekking on., I mean, if we look out here, you'll see tracks into that field, he says. Now, if I'm looking out there, I'm like, 'Wow, that looks like some powder, I'm going to ski that.' So they're going to head downhill. And as they go down, the trees get closer and tighter and tighter, and then they're in a problem., This part of the ridgeline drops off fast and leads far away from any lifts, so within a few hours, the skiers will be exhausted, cold and in the dark., What Search-And-Rescue Teams Say, Giolito and Vermont State Police Capt. Donald Patch believe more skier education is needed, but how to accomplish that remains unclear. In the meantime, Patch says, the cost to taxpayers for so many search and rescues is troubling., When a trooper is tied up on a lost skier case, that's time when they're not following up on their other investigations, Patch says., Vermont is one of a handful of states that allow billing for certain rescues. But because Vermont depends on skiing and tourism and because of safety reasons billing is controversial and rarely used., As search-and-rescuers, we feel very strongly that there should never be any disincentive for somebody to call for help when they need it, says Neil Van Dyke, who heads Stowe Mountain Rescue and is a former president of the Mountain Rescue Association., Robert Giolito, a former ski patrol member at Killington who is now a Vermont state trooper, heads a local volunteer search-and-rescue team., Robert Giolito, a former ski patrol member at Killington who is now a Vermont state trooper, heads a local volunteer search-and-rescue team., He says there have been documented cases in Colorado where people in trouble have put off calling for help because they were afraid of getting billed., But not everyone agrees with that., To Bill Or Not To Bill, Kevin Jordan, who helps run New Hampshire's search-and-rescue program, says when people get in trouble, they don't hesitate to call., They call immediately because they are in trouble, he says., His program which frequently handles rescues in the White Mountains, an area known for severe weather has been less squeamish about billing when it finds that those who were rescued have been reckless or negligent., Jordan says the policy has stirred up debate, but he doesn't think it deters anyone from seeking help though he admits there isn't a way to prove that., What I did notice is when we conduct the mission, as we're getting this person down, our conversation now is generated, 'Am I going to get a bill?' And that's the only difference I've seen, he says. I've seen no effect on tourism., But billing isn't ideal, Jordan says. Many people simply can't pay. He says they've collected only about two-thirds of the $83,000 they've billed in the past five years. And that's just a fraction of the roughly $1.5 million New Hampshire spent on all rescues during that time., 'A Very Hot Debate', It's a very hot debate in this state because people are very passionate and have very strong feelings about it, Jordan says. But the problem is that on Monday the bills have to be paid. And when we're not buying equipment and we don't have a training budget and we're sending guys up above tree line in January in 60-below weather, we have a responsibility to ensure their safety so we're walking a dangerous tightrope., It's an issue many states are struggling with., In Wyoming, a state lawmaker pointed out that demand for search and rescue in the state hasn't necessarily increased. But he says more funding is needed because those who need help are taking bigger chances and ending up in more dangerous situations.
This 5-foot plexiglass piece of art resembling a freshly poured glass of milk sits near the door at Dairy Farmers of America headquarters in Kansas City, Mo., This 5-foot plexiglass piece of art resembling a freshly poured glass of milk sits near the door at Dairy Farmers of America headquarters in Kansas City, Mo., Farmers who had hoped to get some answers on why prices for their raw milk went into free fall a decade ago were disappointed Tuesday by the settlement of a case accusing Dairy Farmers of America Inc. of creating a milk monopoly in the Southeast., Dairy farmers and industry observers had hoped for their day in court after years of delays in the large class-action suit. But the day before the trial was to start in federal court in Tennessee, DFA announced a $158.6 million deal, saying it didn't want to risk going to trial., Although the payout will only go to farmers in the Southeast, the case was being watched as an indicator of the national industry, which has faced dramatic changes as it has become more industrialized and family farmers have been squeezed out., But things were worse in the Southeast, where DFA, a food cooperative that was supposed to represent its 1,700 member farmers, instead made a deal with Dean Foods, a large food company based in Dallas, back in 2001. As NPR's John Burnett reported in 2009, the deal made the milk industry icon Elsie the Cow look instead like Gordon Gekko., The farmers filed suit in 2007, alleging that DFA and Dean conspired to eliminate competition in the Southeast and suppress the prices they would pay farmers for raw milk. In turn, executives made deals that made them rich. DFA's former CEO, Gary Hanman, who was named in the suit, was paid $31.6 million during his seven years as head of the cooperative. Dean's former CEO, Gregg Engles, was paid $156 million, according to published reports., Dean settled its case last summer for $145 million. The DFA settled Tuesday., Where inherently there's risk when you go to trial, the member's interest would be better served by making a business decision to put it behind us, says DFA CEO Rick Smith, who announced his organization's settlement, in which the cooperative admitted no wrongdoing., Veterinarian Sam Galphin, who has worked in Raleigh, N.C., for 30 years, is unhappy with that settlement, saying farmers will see very little money and will get no relief from a bad market that makes it impossible to make any money. He calls the DFA-Dean deal a cartel and bristles at describing it as an industry consolidation., When I started in North Carolina, there were 1,200 dairies. Today there are less than 300. In South Carolina, there were 800 dairies. Today there are less than 100, he says. That's not just consolidation., Peter Carstensen, a University of Wisconsin Madison law professor who has watched the case for years, says he was not surprised by the settlement, but he was disappointed because most of the dairy farmers' problems won't be addressed., While it is nice that the farmers get some modest compensation for the harm that they suffered in the past, they remain at risk, as does the entire milk industry, by the failure to use this case to develop better, more open and nondiscriminatory access to markets for milk, he says., The U.S. Department of Justice investigated the industry on antitrust issues during the George W. Bush administration but didn't file any charges. That's why Carstensen had hoped the DFA case would go to trial, so that the judge could perhaps establish restrictions on DFA, and more family farmers could be competitive., The farmers had sought $1.2 billion in damages from DFA. Combined with the Dean settlement, the dairy farmers should share more than $300 million. , Peggy Lowe is a reporter for Harvest Public Media.
A sale pending sign outside a home in San Francisco last August., A sale pending sign outside a home in San Francisco last August., Though they dipped 1 percent in December from the month before, 2012 was the best year since 2007 for sales of existing homes, the National Association of Realtors reports., It estimates that 4.65 million previously owned homes were sold last year, up 9.2 percent from 2011 and the most since 2007's 5.03 million., The data are the latest in a series of signs that the housing sector, which crashed when its bubble burst in 2008, has steadied. The market has been boosted by low interest rates, prices that are still below their pre-bubble burst levels and a gradual decline in the inventory of foreclosed homes., The association adds that:, The national median existing-home price for all housing types was $180,800 in December, which is 11.5 percent above December 2011. This is the 10th consecutive month of year-over-year price gains, which last occurred from August 2005 to May 2006, and is the strongest increase since November 2005 when it jumped 12.9 percent., For all of 2012, the preliminary median existing-home price was $176,600, up 6.3 percent from $166,100 in 2011, and was the strongest annual price gain since 2005 when the median price rose 12.4 percent.
Experts say universal background checks need to be updated and changed to actually work., Experts say universal background checks need to be updated and changed to actually work., One of President Obama's gun control proposals appears to have widespread support universal background checks for gun purchases. Some experts on mental health and gun violence find problems with the current laws, and they say the system doesn't do a very good job of predicting and preventing gun crime., When you enter Kerley's Hunting and Outfitting in Cupertino, Calif., you're greeted by a taxidermy lion roaring and leaping. There are rows of rifles on the walls, but the owner, Harry Dwyer III, doesn't appear to be as fierce as his mascot., Kerley's is a neighborhood gun shop that has been around since 1969. To the left of the door is an old, weathered National Rifle Association sign, but there is one thing Dwyer and some gun control advocates agree on convicted criminals or the mentally ill shouldn't have easy access to weapons., Unlike most states, California has universal background checks for gun buyers. Dwyer, who has been in the business for years, says it has been that way for decades., State Gun Laws, He explains if you want to sell someone your old shotgun in California, before the deal can be closed, both parties must take the firearm and documentation for the transaction to a federally licensed dealer like Kerley's., We run the background check on the buyer and retain the gun for 10 days while that happens, Dwyer says., California has some of the strictest gun control laws in the country. Advocates argue they've been effective in keeping thousands of guns out of the hands of criminals in the state., Does Federal Law Work?, Federal law is supposed to keep guns out of the hands of the mentally ill, but many say the language in the current law is outdated and confusing., People adjudicated as mentally defective is one category, and the second category are people committed to mental institutions and that's the terminology that's used in that law, says Ron Honberg, director of policy and legal affairs at the National Alliance on Mental Illness., He says the policy language is horribly stigmatizing, and in fact so offensive that it's hard to even discuss the substantive aspects of the law., Honberg also says it's not particularly helpful to officials who have to decide who should and shouldn't be allowed to buy a gun. He says no one really understands what it means., Passing Background Checks, In 2007, Virginia Tech shooter Seung-hui Cho passed two background checks without a problem even though two years earlier he had been found to be a danger to himself and others., Confusion over the language in the law meant his name was never added to the federal database. After that incident, Congress took steps to encourage states to beef up reporting but the problem still persists., Mental health records are woefully incomplete, says Duke professor Philip Cook, who studies gun violence. There are something like 30 states that do not submit records., That is still happening now, years after Virginia Tech and other mass shootings., What Needs To Be Improved, Criminal reporting has gotten better, but it's not perfect., Cook says even when records are accurate and up to date, the current system doesn't do a very good job of predicting and preventing gun crime. He recently completed a study of alleged murderers in the Chicago area., What we found was that only 40 percent of them had a felony conviction in the preceding 10 years, he says., Most of these people could legally buy guns., Cook argues that if background checks are going to be effective they will have to become robust. If officials really want background checks to work, he says, they should examine juvenile records, any violent crimes and even histories of alcohol abuse.
At the Jan. 20, 2009, inauguration of President Obama, Aretha Franklin's hat nearly stole the show. Her chapeau became a sensation, and made its creator, 36-year-old Luke Song, famous overnight., At the Jan. 20, 2009, inauguration of President Obama, Aretha Franklin's hat nearly stole the show. Her chapeau became a sensation, and made its creator, 36-year-old Luke Song, famous overnight., After the first Obama inauguration, everybody talked about three things: the historic moment, the Arctic weather and Aretha Franklin's hat., If it is possible for a piece of millinery to steal the thunder of one of the most-watched moments in recent memory, the Queen of Soul's hat managed to do it. Her gray felt cloche was topped with a giant, matching bow, outlined in rhinestones that flashed in the chill sunlight as she sang My Country 'Tis of Thee., She took the crowd to church in more ways than one. Her version of the patriotic hymn was deeply flavored with the gospel tradition that started her career. And her hat would have been right at home in several black congregations, where a well-worn hat is considered an important part of many churchgoing women's outfits., The hat got, if you'll pardon us, crazy R-E-S-P-E-C-T. And worldwide admiration. It made its creator, 36-year-old Seoul-born Luke Song, globally famous., From Fur To Felt, Song, whose parents started the hat-making business in Detroit when they immigrated from South Korea, came to his craft after spurning a career in medical research. After helping out in the family business, he became well-known in Detroit and in church circles for producing distinctive chapeaus coveted by fashionable African-American ladies. Aretha Franklin had been a customer for some 20 years. She asked him to make a couple of hats that she might consider for the inauguration., Originally, Song said, Franklin wanted fur because it was going to be so cold. But he told her a fur hat, while elegant, came with problems: Fur is hard to light, Song explained. I told her it might cast shadows on her face. So she thought about a backup option. Together they looked at some of the designs Song had created already, and Franklin told him she wanted to combine elements of two: the head-hugging cloche base, and a show-stopping bow from another design., But the queen wanted her crown customized. She told Tell Me More's Michel Martin in 2009 that she instructed Song to tone it down a bit. There were too many stones on the bow for the early morning hour, she said, referencing the pre-noon swearing-in ceremony. So she told him to take all of the rhinestones off and just leave a touch just outline the bow with the stones., And one more change: In the original design, the bow tilted left. Franklin wanted hers tipped to the right: The aesthetics were better for me., What she wanted, you know he got her. And the rest is inauguration 2009 history., The Beloved Big Bow, Of course the hat went on to enjoy a life of its own. It has its own Facebook page. It's now in the Smithsonian, and will ultimately rest in the Obama presidential library, whenever that's built. Later this year, it will tour as part of an exhibition sponsored by the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame., And of course there have been copies, good and bad. Song doesn't mind. It was a great boost for his family's business, and, he says, it made people start to think, 'Where did all the hats go?' Just about everybody has a mother or grandmother or aunt who used to wear hats all the time., Franklin's majestic profile during the 2009 inauguration, Song says, boosted not just his hat business but the industry in general: It's like when she came out in the hat, all of a sudden it jolted people's memories. And maybe encouraged them to also consider hatting up., Song assumes he won't see this year's singer in one of his creations, but he does expect the now-beloved big bow to be part of the inaugural scenery: He started getting orders of versions of the big bow late last year. Women emailed him, telling him they wanted their own big bows to wear to this inauguration., He's watching the ceremony live-streamed from Paris, where he's on business. And where he hopes to see a whole sea of people lots of them in the bow hat.
Standing near the Remington Arms factory, Beth Neale, deputy mayor of Ilion, N.Y., says she's watched a lot of large manufacturers leave the region. She's not sure Ilion would easily recover from losing Remington., Standing near the Remington Arms factory, Beth Neale, deputy mayor of Ilion, N.Y., says she's watched a lot of large manufacturers leave the region. She's not sure Ilion would easily recover from losing Remington., When New York state passed a wave of new gun-control laws on Jan. 15, it outlawed a type of assault rifle made just over an hour's drive from the state capital., In Ilion, N.Y., it's not hard to be across the street or at least around the corner from the Remington Arms factory. Remington makes several types of rifles, including the style used in the Newtown, Conn., elementary school shooting. In response to that tragedy, New York banned that gun, the Bushmaster AR-15, from being sold in the state., The laws were pushed through the Legislature quickly, and there's a feeling in Ilion that no one bothered to ask Remington or the town their opinion., Everyone 'Would Be In Trouble', This town of 8,000 people along the Erie Canal was built around the complex of brick buildings, which began turning out rifles almost 200 years ago. The factory even has its own museum, which draws charter buses full of visitors., A block away, it's lunchtime at Sorrento Pizzeria. A few of the 1,200 Remington workers trickle in and out. Owner Ignazio Magro used to have that schedule. He came to upstate New York from Italy in 1973. He couldn't speak English, and got a job at the plant. He was laid off a decade later, but used his saved wages to open the restaurant., Everybody around this area, if it wasn't for Remington Arms, would be in trouble, he says. Everybody, lunchtime, 12 o'clock, they're coming over here to get a slice of pizza, whatever they needed., Generations Of Workers, Those workers have been worried about their jobs with the recent push for new gun legislation. Frank Rusty Brown and a few dozen other Remington workers traveled to the Capitol last week to try and make their voices heard., Workers from Remington Arms Company in Ilion, N.Y., talk with Assemblyman Marc Butler and Assemblywoman Claudia Tenney about gun legislation at the Capitol on Jan. 14 in Albany, N.Y., Workers from Remington Arms Company in Ilion, N.Y., talk with Assemblyman Marc Butler and Assemblywoman Claudia Tenney about gun legislation at the Capitol on Jan. 14 in Albany, N.Y., I'm one of three generations of my family that worked there. My parents worked there, I work there, my daughter works there, he says. We've been doing this for many years. We have good-paying union jobs at Remington. That company treats us well., In the past, New York has treated Remington's owner well, too. Since 2009, New York's economic development agency has given the gun maker more than $5 million to move jobs to Ilion from factories in other states., John Scarano, director of the county's Chamber of Commerce, is worried the state won't step up if Remington threatens to leave., Probably right now, nobody wants to touch it, he says., He says Remington has always been good to the community., We're not only hurt by maybe the possibility of the loss of jobs, but we're hurt because our friend could be hurt, our friend being Remington Arms, Sarcano says., Thinking Of The Kids, The company sponsors Little League, and children in Ilion go to Remington Elementary School., David Palmer, whose grandkids attend the school, recognizes how important the gun industry is for this part of the state., Watch an Innovation Trail report on the uncertainty in Ilion., This whole valley is run by arms. Most of your stores and everybody here, restaurants, everything, is contingent on that plant, he says., But with young grandkids, he also wants to see some of Remington's products off the shelves., I don't believe in assault rifles. There's no need for it. No need for it in our department stores. ... I used to be a hunter, when I was younger. I can see having regular hunting rifles for people who like to hunt, but there's no need for assault rifles here, he says., Could It Be Remedied?, Palmer worries there will be layoffs, but Brown, the Remington employee, says they haven't heard anything from Remington's owner. The company didn't return requests for an interview with NPR., Ilion Deputy Mayor Beth Neale has been fielding calls and knocks on her door from residents concerned about the future., She says Ilion is a community that bands together in tough times, like when a bus maker left last summer. But Remington leaving could be one blow it can't recover from., We're always fired up, we're always ready, you know, [if] anyone needs help. We always do that, and that's how you survive, she says. I don't know if losing Remington would be something that easily remedied. I really don't., Neale says Ilion and Remington have a long tradition of tradition, and she hopes Remington will always be a part of that.
New homebuilding reached a 4 1/2 year high in December, welcome news for an industry that lost 2 million jobs during the downturn. Despite those job losses, the sector is experiencing a labor shortage in some parts of the U.S., New homebuilding reached a 4 1/2 year high in December, welcome news for an industry that lost 2 million jobs during the downturn. Despite those job losses, the sector is experiencing a labor shortage in some parts of the U.S., The construction industry in the U.S. is staging a comeback. In one indicator, the Commerce Department announced Thursday that new homebuilding has reached its highest level in 4 1/2 years., While that's a promising sign for the industry, more than 2 million construction jobs have been lost in the sector since employment hit its peak. While some might expect that means plenty of people are ready to fill the new jobs, many markets around the country are actually experiencing a shortage of construction workers., When Debbie Bowman left the Army three years ago, she decided to prepare herself for an eventual turnaround in homebuilding. The Floridian enrolled in a program with the Home Builders Institute to train to become an electrician., When the economy picks back up, people are gonna buy houses, and everyone needs an electrician, Bowman explains., Indeed, across the country, there is plenty of demand for people like Bowman, says David Crowe, chief economist for the National Association of Home Builders., 'Can't Hire Enough', I have heard many reports from builders who say they can't hire enough people, they can't find subcontractors, they're unable to get the labor necessary to build homes that they do have on order even at the low level of building that's occurring right now, Crowe says., Many of those laborers went back to their home countries or got jobs elsewhere. All of that has to be reversed, Crowe says. That labor has to come back from where it went, or whatever job it found instead., And Crowe says the crash didn't just force construction workers out. It killed lumber-supply companies and stopped raw land from getting prepped for development. As a result, there are fewer companies and fewer workers all up and down the supply chain., And already, Crowe says, the modest level of demand is beginning to push up prices for everything., We can't get this industry working too fast too quickly, or prices would go out of sight, says Mike Holland, regional president for Marek Brothers, a Houston-based construction firm., A Lack Of Training, Decades ago, Holland says, unions trained workers in the trades skills like plumbing or electrical wiring. But now, companies typically rely on independent contractors and the companies themselves are reluctant to invest in worker training., People have completely abandoned any notion of true workforce development, Holland says. On the professional level, people are thinking about their team, and recruiting and hiring practices and all things that any good businesses have to hold very dear to their heart. [But] those things just don't exist in the craft world., And the whole industry, and eventually consumers, may pay the price for that, Holland says., If all of [a builder's] subcontractors go up 10 percent, then the cost of the house has to go up, Holland says. It's not because of higher quality; it's purely because of supply and demand., So we'll have less good workers, less quality but higher prices because of it, he says., Where Are The Young Workers?, But builders don't always have the flexibility to pass those higher prices along to their customers. Jan Maly, CEO of a specialty contractor in Houston, says finding skilled labor is his No. 1 problem., He pins much of the blame on the fact that young workers aren't coming into the field to replace all the boomers who are retiring. He says that's due to a cultural and political bias in favor of sending all kids to college, and that there's a stigma against blue-collar work., My father used to tell me, 'You gotta go to school [or] you'll be a ditch digger,' says Maly. Well, right now we need ditch diggers., Maly says many people don't make even the first-round cut of passing drug and criminal checks, let alone bring the skills necessary to do the job., We have to do background and drug checks on just about everybody, Maly says. You'd be quite amazed if you knew how many people were disqualified. Sixty percent fail., Maly says competition for local workers is reaching a fever pitch, in part because Exxon Mobil is building a massive new headquarters in the Houston area. It costs Maly's company $10,000 to train each new worker, and frequently, when labor is short, poaching becomes a big concern., It probably means somebody's gonna try to steal our folks, Maly says. For now, he hopes he can hang onto his quality people and that they will refer other workers to fill his ranks.
The Underlying Logic of the Office, by Ray Fisman and Tim Sullivan, Hardcover, 308 pages | purchase, More on this book:, Those of us who work in an office know that there is at least some part of the organization that is utterly frustrating., In The Org: The Underlying Logic of the Office, authors Tim Sullivan and Ray Fisman argue that the back-to-back meetings and unending bureaucracy serve an important purpose., The fact is, Sullivan says, no matter how much we love our jobs, there will be aspects of it that we're not so crazy about. No matter how much we love our jobs, there will be times when to the detriment of the company we'd rather just put our heads on our desks and take a nap., And that's where the cameras and the oversight, and the checks and balances come in, to make sure even when we may not want to we're still getting the job done for the organization., Of course there are office dysfunctions that have no underlying logic to them, and you can see a better way, says Fisman., They talk to NPR's Neal Conan about the necessary chaos of the workplace., On the importance of meetings, Fisman: The much maligned meeting, which many people see as a source of pointless inefficiency there's a lot that just can't be conveyed by a spreadsheet and written report., So, as inefficient as it may seem, to have these meetings where we get together to exchange what I guess I'll call soft information, it's the only way that certain critical scraps get uncovered. It's also, you might say, a mark of a great leader, a great manager, someone who can essentially extract the necessary information he needs to make decisions from these face-to-face meetings. ..., At some point you have to look people in the eye and say, 'Really? Can you explain to me how that's going to work?' , On the organizational structure of al-Qaida, Sullivan: Al-Qaida, especially in the late '90s and also leading up to 2001, to 9/11 and afterward, al-Qaida was often cited as kind of the optimal organization. It was networked, had cells. It had these fiercely devoted employees, if you will, who were willing to kill themselves for the cause. And people pointed out that al-Qaida would be something that could never be taken down by a big centralized organization like the U.S. military., In fact, we see that at play in Iraq in the first years of the war, but there is a discovery of documents by the U.S. military and they find a memo. You don't think of al-Qaida as writing memos. There's a memo from the head of al-Qaida to the guy who runs the branch office in Cairo. And it says something like:, Tim Sullivan (left) is the editorial director of the Harvard Business Review Press. Ray Fisman co-directs the social enterprise program at Columbia University's business school., Tim Sullivan (left) is the editorial director of the Harvard Business Review Press. Ray Fisman co-directs the social enterprise program at Columbia University's business school., Dear Mohammed, I hope this note finds you well. You may remember that we sent you some money to buy an air conditioner for the office, for the brothers' comfort, some time ago. It has come to our attention that, in fact, you may not have used that money to buy the air conditioner. You may have used it to take your family on vacation. We, of course, don't believe this to be true, but we really need to see that receipt for the air conditioner. You can imagine what the consequences are., So, the point being that even if you have this nimble cellular organization, the weight of organizing is such that it's going to cause certain things to happen to it., On why everyone can't work for themselves, Fisman: You can imagine how expensive it would be, for example, if as an individual enterprise, I decided I would build my very own toaster. So, it's the nature of production. There are some things that are just done a lot more efficiently in groups. And the moment we come together in groups, we get the bureaucracy that comes to characterize every organization. So it's a tradeoff between doing stuff as a team, with a manager bossing people around, versus taking care of ... everything through a set of market transactions where effectively prices decide what gets done., So you can think about it from an economist perspective as thinking about what form of organizing is going to do things more efficiently and cheaply, with a boss telling people what to do or a market and prices essentially directing traffic in our economy.
When The Salt posted Wednesday that Whole Foods CEO John Mackey told Morning Edition that President Obama's health care overhaul isn't socialism, it's fascism, there was quite a response. The post has more than 500 comments, so far., On CBS This Morning today, Mackey said that was a bad choice of words on my part because fascism has an association with dictatorships. But, he added, in his opinion we no longer have free enterprise capitalism in health care. Mackey sees too much government involvement and not a system ... where people are able to innovate., Look for more about all this on The Salt.
Going up in Chicago: Row houses under construction., Going up in Chicago: Row houses under construction., There were 335,000 first-time claims for unemployment insurance last week, down 37,000 from the week before, the Employment and Training Administration reports., That's the lowest total for any one week since January 2008., In other good economic news, the Census Bureau and Department of Housing and Urban Development say there was a 12.1 percent gain in housing starts in December from November. Starts were up 36.9 percent from December 2011., Construction was begun on an estimated 780,000 housing units last year. According to The Associated Press, it was the best year since 2008., Home construction is a closely watched economic indicator not only because of the jobs it creates in the building industry, but for its ripple effects on other parts of the economy including the appliance, furniture and retail industries.
In Tokyo today, a United Airlines 787 Dreamliner sat at a gate., In Tokyo today, a United Airlines 787 Dreamliner sat at a gate., Update at 10:10 a.m. ET, Jan. 17: All 50 of the new Boeing 787 Dreamliners owned by airlines around the world have now been pulled out of service so that engineers can figure out why some of the jets' batteries have emitted smoke and in at least once instance caused a fire., We've followed the developments since Wednesday evening. Here's our original post and earlier updates:, The Federal Aviation Administration has ordered the U.S. fleet of Boeing 787 planes to be grounded, citing an incident in Japan earlier today in which one of the jet's batteries emitted smoke. The Japanese report came a week after a similar incident occurred in Boston., The FAA says that its safety directive will also likely be followed in other countries, as well., The only U.S. carrier that currently uses the 787 is United Airlines, which the FAA says has six planes in service. The planes were grounded in Japan after an All Nippon Airways flight made an emergency landing Tuesday., The agency said Wednesday afternoon that it has issued an emergency airworthiness directive, to look into a potential battery fire risk in the 787 and require operators to temporarily cease operations., The FAA says it will work with Boeing and airlines to get the planes back in the air, as NPR's Wendy Kaufman reports on today's All Things Considered., The second incident in Japan involved a lithium ion battery. The FAA said, The battery failures resulted in release of flammable electrolytes, heat damage, and smoke on two Model 787 airplanes., Update at 10 a.m. ET, Jan. 17. Ethiopian Airlines' 787s Also Grounded: , The BBC says Ethiopian Airlines has also grounded its four Dreamliners, which means all 50 of the planes owned by airlines around the world are now out of service., Update at 8:15 a.m. ET, Jan. 17: Planes Grounded By European Authorities Also:, There are only two 787s being used by a European carrier, Poland's LOT, but they too have been ordered to stay on the ground, as the Los Angeles Times reports.
JPMorgan Chase reports that its profits were up 53 percent in the fourth quarter of 2012 but CEO Jamie Dimon's pay will be cut in half, after the bank lost billions of dollars on risky bets made in its London office. The incident tarnished the reputation of Dimon, who had successfully steered his bank through the recent financial crisis., This past year has been a bruising one for Dimon, as NPR's Steve Henn reports for our Newscast unit:, Lax oversight of trading operation in London resulted in enormous losses by the bank. A single trader nicknamed Voldemort or the London Whale placed multibillion-dollar bets on complex synthetic derivatives. When those bets went bad, the bank lost billions. An internal investigation placed the blame at Dimon's feet and now the board has cut his compensation in half, to just over $11 million., The company says that the bets made by trader Bruno Iksil cost it $6.2 billion in nine months, Bloomberg reports., JPMorgan Chase said its net income was $5.7 billion in the fourth quarter of 2012. And the company praised Dimon for the way he handled the mess that emerged from the bad investments., As NPR's Marilyn Geewax reported last October, Dimon told an audience at the Council on Foreign Relations that I should have caught it ... I didn't., He added that making mistakes and learning from them is part of capitalism.
The cost of a gallon of gas kept rising last year, but not at the torrid pace of 2010 and 2011. That helped keep inflation in check., The cost of a gallon of gas kept rising last year, but not at the torrid pace of 2010 and 2011. That helped keep inflation in check., Consumer prices rose just 1.7 percent in 2012, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reports. That's about half the pace of 2011 when prices went up 3 percent., In December, BLS says, prices were unchanged., One major reason inflation slowed last year: Gas prices went up just 1.7 percent, after gains of 13.8 percent in 2010 and 9.9 percent in 2011. Also, food costs rose 1.8 percent. BLS says that was a deceleration from the 4.7 percent increase in 2011., As Reuters writes, the news that inflation remains in check should help give the Federal Reserve room to prop up the economy by staying on its ultra-easy monetary policy path. In other words, there's no reason to think the Fed will need to start pushing up short-term interest rates anytime soon.
Herbalife, a company that sells weight loss shakes, vitamins and other similar products, is worth billions of dollars. The company has been around for more than 30 years, and it's traded on the New York Stock Exchange., Bill Ackman thinks the whole thing is a pyramid scheme., Ackman manages a hedge fund that has shorted more than a billion dollars' worth of Herbalife stock. If the stock falls and Ackman says he thinks it will fall all the way to zero the fund will make money., Ackman and his colleagues made their case in a three-hour-long speech at an investment conference last month. The PowerPoint presentation had more than 300 slides. It's all online at a website Ackman created (and is advertising on Google whenever people search for Herbalife)., Herbalife doesn't sell its products in stores. It sells them through an army of ordinary people who have signed up to sell the products on their own. The way the business is structured, these people can make more money by signing up other people to be Herbalife distributors., This structure, known as multilevel marketing, isn't unique to Herbalife. Amway and Avon are two other big companies that use it. And there's nothing wrong with it as long as there are real customers out there for the product., Ackman argues that Herbalife is all about recruiting new distributors, and not about selling weight loss shakes and vitamins to real customers., Not surprisingly, Herbalife disagrees. The company says it has millions of customers around the world. The CEO went on CNBC and accused Ackman of market manipulation a typical accusation CEOs hurl against shorts., So, who's right here? How hard can it be to tell whether a giant company is a pyramid scheme? In this case, weirdly, it's really hard., For a company like Herbalife, the difference between being a legitimate business and being a pyramid scheme comes down to what happens on the ground with all those people who signed up to sell products., If it's a legitimate business, they're mostly selling the products to people who actually want to use them., Herbalife officials say that's exactly what's going on. The company recently commissioned a survey that found that 90 percent of the people who buy Herbalife products are not distributors; they're people who just want to drink the shakes or whatever., Des Walsh, the company's president, says Herbalife has been doing steady business for years in Iceland and other small countries where a pyramid scheme wouldn't be able to endure., Ackman argues that the company is constantly going into new markets, exploiting people and moving on. He says distributors often wind up stuck with thousands of dollars' worth of Herbalife products and no customers., Herbalife got a boost last week when another big hedge fund manager, Dan Loeb, announced that his fund had recently bought Herbalife stock worth well over $300 million., Loeb says the company is profitable and is growing. He points out that the federal government has cracked down on pyramid schemes in the past but hasn't had a problem with Herbalife. In a letter to investors, Loeb's fund wrote:, The short thesis rests on the notion that the FTC has been asleep at the switch, missed a massive fraud for three decades and will shortly awaken (at the behest of a hedge fund short seller) to shut down the company. We find this to be preposterous.
Whole Foods has more than 300 stores and continues to expand., Whole Foods has more than 300 stores and continues to expand., UPDATE at 12:35 p.m., ET, Jan. 17: Many of you wrote in to tell us you were taken aback by Whole Foods top executive John Mackey characterizing the health law as fascism in an NPR interview, and apparently, he's feeling a little sheepish., About three minutes into his otherwise amiable chat with CBS This Morning hosts on on Thursday, Mackey walked back his comments in response to a direct question from Norah O'Donnell:, Well, I think that was a bad choice of words on my part ... that word has an association with of course dictatorships in the 20th century like Germany and Spain, and Italy. What I know is that we no longer have free enterprise capitalism in health care, it's not a system any longer where people are able to innovate, it's not based on voluntary exchange. The government is directing it. So we need a new word for it. I don't know what they right word is, Mackey says., John Mackey is co-CEO and co-founder of Whole Foods Market and co-founder of the nonprofit Conscious Capitalism, Inc., John Mackey is co-CEO and co-founder of Whole Foods Market and co-founder of the nonprofit Conscious Capitalism, Inc., Part 1 of his interview with Morning Edition's Steve Inskeep is linked above, and you can hear him discuss the president's health care plan and his other philosophies here in Part 2, which aired Thursday., Our Original Post:, No doubt, Whole Foods has played a key role in propelling organic foods into the mainstream. The specialty supermarket chain has more than 300 stores and plans to continue expanding. But Mackey is not the crunchy granola liberal one might conjure while perusing aisles of earnestly labeled blue corn chips and gently misted red peppers., He's a self-styled libertarian: a vegan who sells sustainably raised meat, a man who compares the government's health care overhaul to fascism but wants to improve American diets., And he thinks big businesses have an obligation to change customers' perception that big corporations are primarily selfish and greedy. (Not that he's opposed to profits. In fact, Whole Foods posted a 49 percent boost in quarterly earnings in November.), Mackey sat down with Inskeep to discuss his philosophy and the new book he co-authored, Conscious Capitalism., Mackey tells Inskeep that companies must have a higher purpose than just making money., For example, when Whole Foods decided it wanted to stop selling overfished species of cod and octopus at its seafood counters, it didn't just abruptly cut off its suppliers. Instead, the company gave its suppliers three years to come up with a better way of fishing; during that time, the seafood stayed for sale but with a label of unsustainable., In the end, Whole Foods, working with the Marine Stewardship Council (we'll have much more on them later), was able to find one supplier of sustainable cod., You take a risk when you do that because some of your customers ... who don't care about sustainability, they're going to go shop at your competitor's store who has the fish, so you lose some business that way, Mackey says. But it was the right thing to do., What he doesn't think is right is President Obama's health overhaul and the new costs that coverage requirements will place on businesses., When Inskeep asks him if he still thinks the health law is a form of socialism, as he's said before, Mackey responds:, Technically speaking, it's more like fascism. Socialism is where the government owns the means of production. In fascism, the government doesn't own the means of production, but they do control it and that's what's happening with our health care programs and these reforms., Still, Mackey sees room to cooperate with the administration on another front: efforts to reform the American diet, a pet project of first lady Michelle Obama., People in America are addicted to sugar, and to fat and to salt, he says, and as a nation, it's holding us back. Food is intensely pleasurable, and people are afraid that if they change the way they eat, they'll stop having pleasure., Still, he acknowledges how hard it can be to stick to a health-conscious diet. Restaurant meals, he says, rarely meet his personal dietary rules not just no meat, but also no oil or refined flour. Luckily, Mackey jokes, there's a Whole Foods to be found wherever he travels., So our question to you, dear readers, is this: How big a role does a business leader's personal philosophy play in your decision to buy products from his or her company? Tell us in the comments section below.
A glass of Czech Budweiser beer is seen at the the Budejovicky Budvar brewery in southern Bohemia. Britain's highest court has ruled that the Budweiser name must be shared by two companies., A glass of Czech Budweiser beer is seen at the the Budejovicky Budvar brewery in southern Bohemia. Britain's highest court has ruled that the Budweiser name must be shared by two companies., The word Budweiser will continue to mean two different things in Britain, where the brand name has been a bone of contention for more than a decade. The U.K. Supreme Court has ruled against Anheuser-Busch InBev's request to stop Czech brewery Budvar from selling beer under the Budweiser name., Budvar is much smaller than its AB-Inbev-owned rival. And while Anheuser-Busch was first to seek to trademark the Budweiser name in Britian, the Czech company entered the British market one year ahead of the then-St. Louis-based brewer, according to Reuters., Tuesday's ruling is being seen as the end of one battle among many. It comes more than two years after a European Union ruling that quashed AB-InBev's attempt to to register the Budweiser name as its trademark an attempt that was contested by Budvar., Currently there are about 40 trademark dispute cases pending in different jurisdictions and some 70 procedural issues up for consideration around the world, Budvar says on its website. The company cites recent victories in Japan, South Korea, Greece, Portugal, Denmark, Sweden, Finland and New Zealand., Those venues expose the ambitious growth strategies of both companies, which for decades operated under a form of detente, agreeing to confine themselves to certain geographic regions when they sold beer under the Budweiser name., On its British website, Budvar calls itself The Original. While its home city of Ceske Budejovice (or, in German, Budweis) first began producing beer 500 years before the founding of the United States, the Budvar brewery wasn't founded until 1895 19 years after the Budweiser name was chosen for a new beer being made in St. Louis., We must also note that Budweiser's corporate roots aren't as American as they once were. It is now owned by global giant AB InBev, which is headquartered in Belgium., According to the AP, Budvar reported record exports for 2012, sending 657,000 hectoliters (17.36 million gallons) of beer to 58 countries last year, the best result in 117 years., That number pales next to Budweiser's sales figures, which nearly hit 400 million hectoliters worldwide in 2011, Reuters says., Despite their dispute over an essential brand name, Budweiser and Budvar reached an agreement in 2007 that named Anheuser-Busch as the U.S. importer of Budvar's beer., In Britain, AB InBev has used the Budweiser name to sponsor high-profile sporting events in recent months, from NFL games to soccer. Budweiser was also the official beer of the London 2012 Summer Olympics.
Japchae, a cooking class and Korean supper club held in 2012 in Ballston, Va., was organized through the site Feastly., Japchae, a cooking class and Korean supper club held in 2012 in Ballston, Va., was organized through the site Feastly., Remember all that hype about underground supper clubs a few years back? They lure adventurous diners into homes and makeshift spaces where fledgling chefs cook up feasts for pay. The hosts trade in secrecy and exclusivity, and play up food specificity with themes like Pig Every Which Way, Jewish Soul Food and A Taste Of Tripoli (because there is no Libyan restaurant in town). And, on top of the food, attendees can revel in the novel experience of eating face-to-face, side-by-side with total strangers., While these dinners may seem like old hat to some foodies, a handful of startups are betting that the concept is just taking off, and see it expanding to a growing number of cities. Here's the skinny on four companies dedicated to helping people find, organize, monetize and manage supper clubs:, Feastly says it's aiming to be the Airbnb of the food world, creating alternatives to impersonal dining the way that the travel rental company has created an alternative market to generic hotels., We want to be in every city in the world so wherever you're traveling, you can find a home-cooked meal, Danny Harris, co-founder of Feastly, tells The Salt., Here's how it works: The site connects chefs (many of them professional) who want to host paid meals or tastings of a new product in their homes with feasters looking for a unique dining experience. The chefs set the price of the meal, and Feastly takes a 20 percent cut. Harris says chefs can make up to a few hundred dollars in profit at the end of the night if they play their cards right., Of course, depending on local regulations, these supper clubs may be illegal. To assuage diners worried about food safety, the Feastly site says hosts opt in to its guidelines. But that doesn't mean supper clubs are above health authorities one in New Jersey was shut down last year because it didn't have a license., Harris and his partner, Noah Karesh, launched Feastly in early 2012 in Washington, D.C., and recently opened up to chefs in New York. Next month, it launches in San Francisco., Gusta, another site, operates under a similar premise and has built a network of 287 chefs in dozens of cities from Berlin to Portland, Ore., to Charleston, S.C. Co-founder Carly Chamberlain, a former employee of Airbnb, told Food+Tech Connect in 2011 that it has a more international focus than other sites and can handle multiple currencies., A newcomer to the supper club business is Kitchen.ly, which, like Feastly and Gusta, provides a space online for chefs to list events and diners to sign up for them. But don't expect to find much on there yet: It held its inaugural dinner in founder Mitch Monsen's kitchen in Ogden, Utah, on Friday. Kitchen.ly could turn out to be slightly more affordable than the others the site claims that the only charges to organize an event are processing fees of 2.9 percent plus 30 cents., For chefs and diners who prefer to organize free dinner events on their phones, there's an app for that, and it's called Supper King. A recent search turned up only two events one in Oakland, Calif., and another in Hamburg. As with all of the services, the trick will be to find enough users to keep people coming back., Feastly's Harris believes they will., There are all of these people out there who want to open a restaurant or food truck but don't have the money to do it, or they have a day job and make incredible vegan food and want to share it, he says. They just need a platform to monetize their passion, and we believe we'll succeed with that., Still, a comparison to Airbnb might be a stretch. Feastly says their events, on average, cost about the same as the average restaurant meal ($35), while Airbnb has managed to undercut the hotel industry by offering far cheaper rates per night.
The scene in a Wal-Mart store in Alexandria, Va., The scene in a Wal-Mart store in Alexandria, Va., Saying that hiring a veteran can be one of the best business decisions you make, Wal-Mart U.S. CEO Bill Simon confirmed this morning that the retail giant is launching a plan to hire more than 100,000 recently discharged veterans over the next five years., According to the company, beginning Memorial Day, [it] will offer a job to any honorably discharged veteran in his or her first 12 months off active duty. Most of these jobs will be in Walmart stores and clubs, and some will be in distribution centers and the Home Office., Simon, speaking at the National Retail Federation's annual convention in Manhattan, said that not every returning veteran wants to work in retail but every veteran who does will have a place to go. He spoke of having both part-time and full-time positions available for those who wish them., Simon, who served in the Navy as a young man, said he can think of no better group to lead in revitalizing our economy than those who have served in uniform., According to The New York Times, Wal-Mart's plan represents among the largest hiring commitments for veterans in history. As the Times notes:, The unemployment rate for veterans of the recent wars has remained stubbornly above that for nonveterans, though it has been falling steadily, dropping to just below 10 percent for all of 2012. That was down from 12.1 percent the year before. The year-end unemployment rate for nonveterans was 7.9 percent in 2012., Wal-Mart now employs about 1.4 million people in the U.S., Related story from Morning Edition: Training Program Aims To Prep Soldiers For Civilian Jobs.
Shoppers in Manhattan on Christmas Eve last month., Shoppers in Manhattan on Christmas Eve last month., Retail sales rose 0.5 percent in December from November, the Census Bureau says. That may be a sign that as 2012 ended consumers were still in a shopping mood even as lawmakers in Washington struggled to keep the federal government from going over the so-called fiscal cliff., Bloomberg News says the better-than-expected sales figure, which is adjusted to hopefully smooth out the effects of the holidays and show the real growth, is a sign that consumers were looking beyond the year-end budget battle among U.S. lawmakers., Consumers continue to spend at a decent pace, Russell Price, senior economist at Ameriprise Financial Inc. in Detroit, told Bloomberg., Such spending is critical: Consumers purchase about 70 percent of the goods and services companies produce., For the year, retail sales were up 5.2 percent., Also this morning, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that wholesale prices declined 0.2 percent in December from November and were up just 1.3 percent for the year.
1 of 12, This week, the sleek, speedy Chevy Corvette turns 60 years old. In the increasingly competitive auto business, where few cars make it past their teens, that makes it nearly ancient., General Motors, however, is not retiring one of America's oldest sports cars just yet, and is embarking on the perilous path of updating the beloved brand. The auto company unveiled the new 2014 Corvette at the Detroit Auto Show on Sunday, a model that also revives the long-dormant Stingray name., The Corvette is iconic not just in the car industry but also in culture. Tadge Juechter, the chief engineer at Corvette, says the hardest part is bringing the car into the 21st century while making it look like a Corvette., We don't want to do retro, Juechter says, who has spent 20 years on the Corvette and almost 40 at GM. We don't want to go back and do like some manufacturers [and] go relive the glory days., What's new about this car, and almost every car at the Detroit Auto Show, is the push to make it more fuel efficient. The new Corvette uses aluminum and carbon fiber to keep it lighter and faster., It has a low roof and big wheels and a low hood. ... It [just] looks really fast, Juechter says., It is very different, but you'll still recognize it as a Corvette., Meanwhile, the current Corvette is in the basement as far as sales go. Chevy barely sold 12,000 last year., Brian Moody of AutoTrader says that despite its price tag and impracticality, the Corvette's importance goes far beyond a sales number., It's almost like a rolling billboard for the company, for the attitude of the company [and] the spirit of the company, he says., Moody says you don't necessarily build a high-performance sports car to sell a lot of high-performance sports cars; he says more people will probably end up buying Chevy Impalas and Malibus as a result of the Corvette than will actually buy Corvettes., Eric Gustafson, the editor of Corvette Magazine, loves Corvettes as much as anyone, but he says he's part of a devoted but aging and dwindling crowd., The big challenge is to find new customers, Gustafson says, and not only new customers now, but new customers that are going to buy the car in 10 years.
A student walks past a sculpture made of empty water bottles on the University of Vermont campus. UVM has banned the sale of bottled water., A student walks past a sculpture made of empty water bottles on the University of Vermont campus. UVM has banned the sale of bottled water., When students at the University of Vermont resume classes on the snow-covered Burlington campus Monday, something will be missing: bottled water. UVM is the latest university to ban on-campus sales of bottled water., At one of UVM's recently retrofitted refill stations, students fill up their reusable bottles with tap water. For many of the 14,000 students and staff on this campus, topping off their refillable bottles is an old habit., It's much more convenient to fill up your water bottle at a water fountain than to buy bottled water, says Mikayla McDonald, a recent graduate, who a few years ago helped to launch the campaign that led to UVM's ban. McDonald hopes it will reduce waste. But for her, it's not just about changing behavior on campus., Bottled water is a symbol of our culture's obsession with commodifying things that should be public trust resources, she says., In that spirit, a few other American colleges have restricted or banned the sale of bottled water to promote sustainability. But the University of Vermont is the largest public institution to do so, and that development disappoints beverage companies., I think they're concerned because it's such a radical step, says lobbyist Andrew MacLean, who represents local water and soft drink distributors in Vermont. He agrees with the students' environmental goals, but he thinks an outright ban restricts free choice and will ultimately fail., The factors that will result in more materials getting out of landfills is going to be a cooperative effort promoting strong recycling, he argues., But at least one New England town says recycling isn't enough to keep plastic bottles out of its waste stream. Concord, Mass. perhaps best known for its role in the American Revolution joined the student movement this month, outlawing the sale of single-serve plastic water bottles in its stores.
The interior of a United Airlines Boeing 787 Dreamliner., The interior of a United Airlines Boeing 787 Dreamliner., Update at 9:42 a.m. ET. Review Ordered:, Saying that we are confident about the safety of this aircraft, but we are concerned about these incidents, Federal Aviation Administration Administrator Michael Huerta confirmed Friday morning that his agency has ordered a review of Boeing's new 787 Dreamliner after a series of problems in recent days, including fuel leaks and an electrical fire., The planes are not being grounded. Boeing says it welcomes the review and is confident in the aircraft's safety., From the Web: A Guardian interactive graphic on the Dreamliner's faults., Huerta said there is nothing in the data that would suggest the airplane is not safe and that like all modern aircraft, the Dreamliner has numerous backup systems and redundancies., Our original post and an earlier update:, Federal regulators say they are ordering a comprehensive review of the critical systems of Boeing's 787s, the aircraft maker's newest and most technologically advanced plane, after a fire and a fuel leak earlier this week, The Associated Press writes., Reuters adds that FAA officials will announce the decision at a news conference later this morning, according to a person familiar with the matter., According to The Wall Street Journal, the review won't ground planes or halt production, but the FAA has broad latitude to take action as a result of any findings. That could range from ordering new production procedures to revising designs of some electric components, which potentially could prompt further production delays and additional costs for Boeing., The news comes as there's word of another two incidents aboard Dreamliners. USA Today writes that on Friday ... an All Nippon Airways aircraft suffered a crack to its windscreen during a flight in Japan and an oil leak was found coming from the engine of a separate plane after it landed at an airport in southern Japan., The Journal, which broke the news of the FAA review Thursday evening, says the investigation will focus on the plane's electrical system and quality controls used in the manufacturing process. And, the Journal writes, the unusual move comes after the agency has spent months monitoring various electrical problems and other operational glitches affecting the planes, according to people familiar with the matter, but was specifically prompted by a battery fire on Monday aboard a Japan Airlines Co. 787 on the ground in Boston., As the AP has written:, The new plane is undoubtedly Boeing's most visible. It's built from composites instead of aluminum and comes with the promise of the most comfortable ride in the sky. At $200 million each, 787s are an important part of Boeing's future, even though it will be a while before it makes money on them., But this sophisticated piece of transportation wizardry hasn't been behaving as designed. Just this week one caught fire, and another suffered a fuel leak. The 787 was delayed for three years, so Boeing's investors and customers notice each time one has a problem. Boeing asserts such growing pains are typical for new models., Update at 9:30 a.m. ET. News Conference:, Transportation Secretary Ray LaHood and FAA Administrator Michael Huerta are holding a news conference now to discuss a comprehensive review of Boeing 787 critical systems, including the design, manufacture and assembly.
In this handout image provided by the White House, President Obama talks with Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner at the United Nations on Sept. 23, 2010., In this handout image provided by the White House, President Obama talks with Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner at the United Nations on Sept. 23, 2010., U.S. Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner speaks during the Washington Ideas Forum at the Newseum on Sept. 30, 2010, in Washington, D.C., U.S. Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner speaks during the Washington Ideas Forum at the Newseum on Sept. 30, 2010, in Washington, D.C., Outgoing Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner has had a bruising four years. He took office when the U.S. economy was plunging into the worst recession since the Great Depression., Nominating Jack Lew as Geithner's successor Thursday, President Obama praised his departing Treasury secretary for helping to get the economy back on track., With the wreckage of our economy still smoldering and unstable, I asked Tim to help put it back together, Obama said. And thanks in large part to his steady hand, our economy has been growing again for the past three years, our businesses have created nearly 6 million new jobs., Obama went on to cite other issues Geithner shepherded, including the financial overhaul and the bailout of the U.S. auto industry., When the history books are written, Tim Geithner is going to go down as one of our finest secretaries of the Treasury, Obama said., Fending Off Calls For Resignation, The sustained applause for Geithner from an audience that included his administration colleagues was in great contrast to the reception he often got on Capitol Hill. After less than a year in office, Republicans, like Texas Rep. Kevin Brady, were asking him to resign., Poll after poll shows the public has lost confidence in this ... president's ability to handle the economy, Brady said in November 2009. For the sake of our jobs, will you step down from your post?, Geithner responded to that request with a burst of emotion, saying the president's policies had broken the back of the financial panic and turned the economy around., Without those actions ... you would have an economy still falling, not growing. You would have had job losses still accelerating, not slowing. You would have had the value of American savings still falling, not rising, he said., 'Vastly Better Off', Alan Blinder, an economics professor at Princeton University and former vice chairman of the Federal Reserve's Board of Governors, says history will view Geithner as a successful Treasury secretary., We will be vastly better off on the day Tim Geithner leaves office ... compared to the day he took office. There's just no doubt about that. So, the progress will be huge, he says., In listing Geithner's accomplishments, Blinder, who was also an economic adviser for the Clinton White House, points first to Geithner's handling of the financial crisis, especially the bank stress tests., It was a modern equivalent of FDR's bank holiday. Geithner didn't have to go that far close all the banks, he says. The success and the plausibility of the results of the stress tests renewed confidence in the banks, and people stopped worrying about them going bust., Working With Wall Street, But Giethner's record is not unblemished. Where he stumbled badly, Blinder says, was in handling the foreclosure crisis. Sheila Bair, the former head of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., agrees. She says Geithner was too concerned about helping the big Wall Street banks., They were successful in stabilizing those institutions, but they weren't successful in getting credit flowing to the real economy again, she says. We hardly spent any money on helping distressed homeowners, and ... those distressed mortgages were at the heart of the problem., Bair also credits Geithner for the success of the bank stress tests, and for other financial reforms. But ultimately, she argues, Geithner's Wall Street-centric view prolonged the country's economic problems., The economy is better, yes, but is it as good as it should be? No, it's not, she says., Geithner would agree that the economy still has a long way to go, but he stands by the steps he took to bring it back from the edge of the abyss.
American Express Co. announced Thursday that it was cutting 5,400 jobs, primarily in its travel business, and take a $287 million restructuring charge associated with those layoffs., The charge is likely to lower the company's adjusted fourth quarter net income by 46 percent from a year earlier. Excluding the charge, however, the company said its fourth quarter adjusted net income was $1.2 billion, or $1.09 per share., Against the backdrop of an uneven economic recovery, these restructuring initiatives are designed to make American Express more nimble, more efficient and more effective in using our resources to drive growth, Chairman and CEO Kenneth Chenault said in a statement., Here's more from Bloomberg:, The cuts account for about 8.5 percent of AmEx's 63,500- person workforce, a number that will be mitigated as the company refills some jobs, according to the statement. The total number of employees by year-end will drop by 4 percent to 6 percent and American Express expects to hold increases in annual operating expenses to less than 3 percent, the firm said., The company said the job cuts will take place across seniority levels, businesses and staff groups., The largest reductions will come in the travel businesses, which operate in an industry that is being fundamentally reinvented as a result of the digital revolution, the statement added.
Credit: NPR, OK, OK. We know that you don't actually need $1 trillion worth of platinum to make this debt-defying coin., But just for the sake of some financial fun, how much platinum would you actually need to mint a coin that contains a trillion dollars worth of platinum?, Turns out, it's probably more than mankind has available on the market right now., Before we do the math, we need to be sure we're on the same page about what a trillion is. In many countries, a trillion is one million million million, or 1,000,000,000,000,000,000., But here in the U.S., it's just a million million, or 1,000,000,000,000. So let's go with that., If you log on to your favorite precious metal website, you can pick up some platinum coins today for about $1,620 an ounce. (Though you'd probably get a bulk discount you've got a hefty order)., To make a coin that contains $1 trillion worth of platinum, you'd need about 617 million ounces. That's about 19,300 tons of platinum. Or, approximately 2,000 school buses or two Eiffel Towers., Face it, you're not going to be flipping that coin. As for vending machines, we expect they'd short-circuit at the sight of one., And just what would 19,000 tons of platinum look like? It would take up about 30,000 cubic feet of space, so you would need about five 18-wheelers to haul it around., According to the U.S. Geological Survey, the world mined about 192 tons of platinum in 2011, so at today's rate, it would take about 100 years to get it out of the ground., But as we said, if the president decided he wanted Treasury to produce a $1 trillion platinum coin, he just has to say so. And we all just have to agree that's what it's worth. Whether it really is or isn't., (Michaeleen Doucleff is one of the gold-plated associate producers on NPR's Science Desk.)
Jeremy Kroll runs K2 Intelligence, an investigative firm in Midtown Manhattan that specializes in corporate monitoring., Jeremy Kroll runs K2 Intelligence, an investigative firm in Midtown Manhattan that specializes in corporate monitoring., As businesses face more complex regulations and heightened scrutiny by prosecutors, companies are turning to investigative firms to help keep watch over their employees., The idea behind the corporate monitoring business is to nip misconduct in the bud before law enforcement catches a whiff of it. These corporate detectives-for-hire are seeing good business these days, and finding new ways to snoop., We all know our employers have access to tons of data about us. They can see every person we email from our company email account, every phone number we dial from our desk., But what if you found out that every bit of that vast ocean of data was being analyzed so that your company could build a portrait of you?, That's what Matt Unger is hired to do. Unger is like the computer-geek-in-chief for K2 Intelligence, an investigative firm in Midtown Manhattan that specializes in corporate monitoring., Unger is no ordinary gumshoe. He's helping K2 repurpose counterterrorism software developed by the government to catch insider traders., What Do These Corporate Monitors Do?, Sliding behind a desk and scrolling through screen after screen on his monitor, Unger demonstrated how the software takes snapshots of a person's behavior at a company at any given time., We see that this guy Kevin all of a sudden started calling the 410 area code where he never did that before, and he stopped answering emails he's being less responsive to his peers, Unger said, pointing at a group of statistics clustered under the individual's name. What has he got cooking on the outside that he's spending so much time on the phone and he's not able to answer his peers?, There isn't a specific list of behaviors that corporate monitors can say are slam-dunk signs someone is committing misconduct. They won't accuse you just because you took four sick days in a row, or if you phoned your co-worker 10 times in a day. It's more complex than that., In the case of trying to find insider traders, these monitors aggregate an ocean of data about you the people you usually message through your company email account, the phone numbers you dial from your desk, the colleagues you instant message at work. And then they look for sudden changes in that behavior., For example, two people who usually communicate by email suddenly talk only by phone for a few days. And during that time, one of them sells off a bunch of stock from a pharmaceutical company right before the company announces unfavorable information about a drug they're marketing. Monitors might see that as something worth checking out., What Unger is looking for are sudden changes in behavior. Some changes don't mean anything at all, he said, but when people are up to no good, they usually start acting a bit differently. His software can instantly see when two people who usually only email each other suddenly switch to phone communication for a few days. And if one of them does a big trade during that time, that's something to check out., A Booming Business, Unger's boss, Jeremy Kroll, said more clients are asking for this monitoring, especially with the uptick in insider trading convictions the past couple of years, Two years ago, when we started to talk to clients about a preventative solution vis-a-vis insider trading, we got a lot of nodding heads and saying, 'That's really interesting.' But no one was biting, Kroll said., What's emerged is a multibillion-dollar corporate detective industry aimed at ferreting out not only insider trading, but also money laundering, bribery, embezzlement and fraud., Kroll's firm is where former CIA agents find second careers same with ex-prosecutors, cops and investigative reporters. And they're landing big-name clients like JPMorgan Chase and Brookfield Properties., The corporate monitoring business is looking so promising, K2 wants to expand. So this month, it acquired Thacher Associates, a company that has spent years monitoring construction projects for fraud., There's no question today that corporate America is much more concerned about turning a lens on itself, said Toby Thacher, CEO of Thacher Associates. This is not just out of a heightened level of concern about ethics. It's self-preservation., Call It Preventative Care, Fines for breaking the law can run into billions of dollars. Take HSBC, for example. The bank agreed last month to pay a $2 billion fine to settle allegations that it was helping Mexican drug cartels launder money., The average price tag for any of these corporate monitoring jobs can run from five to seven figures. But Jeremy Kroll said those fees will help you save on the back end., I think the smart CEOs and boards are saying, 'It's not a question of whether something naughty is going on in our company; it's a question of where and how often, he said., Kroll's dad is often called the father of the corporate monitoring industry. Jules Kroll was a former prosecutor when he started the investigative firm Kroll Inc. back in 1972., Does Monitoring Break Any Rules?, These firms say most of their monitoring happens out in the open employees are informed about their presence. These monitors help companies design codes of ethics and financial controls to prevent waste and abuse., But some employment law experts say they're concerned that these firms could be hired to do other things like spy on communications among union organizers, or hunt down whistle-blowers., K2 officials say they've never been hired to do that. In fact, Thacher says his business requires standing up to companies., There've been situations where we have found that principals of companies have engaged in kickbacks, embezzlements, fraud, steering of contracts, where the company felt that the principals involved were too important to the company to risk exposing this to law enforcement or regulatory entities, he said., So Thacher said he resigned in at least two of those cases., Credibility is everything in the industry because so much of the business comes from the government., Sometimes companies are forced to hire outside monitors as a result of settlements with regulators. That happened to HSBC and to Standard Chartered, a London bank that was also accused of money laundering. Now, the federal government is considering whether to require hedge funds to report suspicious transactions., And that will only mean more business for all the private corporate watchdogs out there.
No, this isn't worth $1 trillion. It's a commemorative coin minted in the U.K. in 2008. But some have suggested the president's image should be on it if he orders up a $1 trillion coin., No, this isn't worth $1 trillion. It's a commemorative coin minted in the U.K. in 2008. But some have suggested the president's image should be on it if he orders up a $1 trillion coin., We're pretty sure this won't happen., But ..., You practically can't visit a news site these days without seeing a story about why President Obama should or should not order the Treasury Department to strike a platinum coin worth $1 trillion and deposit it with the Federal Reserve., And why would Obama want to do that? Because, as we've said, the next big political battle in Washington comes in mid-February when the federal government again hits its debt ceiling and won't be able to borrow any more money. Republicans are saying they won't go along with an increase of the debt ceiling unless Democrats agree to some serious spending cuts. President Obama has said he's not going to go through another battle like the one in 2011 when much of the government almost had to shut down., So, the idea has been raised of putting a $1 trillion coin in the Fed's vaults which in theory, at least, would mean the government has more money available to borrow against and won't bump up against its debt ceiling., New York Times columnist and Nobel Prize winner Paul Krugman is on board:, Should President Obama be willing to print a $1 trillion platinum coin if Republicans try to force America into default? Yes, absolutely. He will, after all, be faced with a choice between two alternatives: one that's silly but benign, the other that's equally silly but both vile and disastrous. The decision should be obvious., Washington Post columnist and Wonkblog economics editor Neil Irwin calls the idea idiotic, but says if there is no resolution of the debt ceiling through the legislative process, I hate some of the alternatives more., At Forbes, though, columnist Maura Pennington reads such opinions and says forgive me for hoping that the standard of behavior for adults was a little better than 'just don't be the most ridiculous person in attendance.' , Wednesday at the White House, The Hill writes, spokesman Jay Carney was asked repeatedly to clarify the White House's position on the platinum coin during his daily press briefing, but seemed to downplay although not completely proscribe the idea., But is it remotely likely to happen? One of the Times' more conservative columinsts, Ross Douthat, thinks not:, A White House that played the coin card in negotiations would be answering threats to sabotage the nation's credit with a threat to ... massively sabotage its own political position. And that sabotage would have inevitable consequences for the actual effectiveness of the coin maneuver in the event that the debt ceiling wasn't lifted: If Republicans were successful in portraying coin-minting as a Bond villain scheme rather than a legitimate policy move and I really, really think they would be, no matter how the media covered it then it's hard to see the markets maintaining any kind of equilibrium while the White House used a maneuver that even its apologists concede is 'usually a sign of severe distress' to cover the government's obligations., By the way, why platinum? Because, as The Christian Science Monitor and others have pointed out, it's the one metal that Treasury can use to produce coins of any denomination. That's a legal loophole some lawmakers are trying to close., And one more thing about a $1 trillion coin: Slate, which asked readers to offer potential designs, also debunks the biggest myth about the platinum coin option that is, you don't actually need $1 trillion worth of platinum to make the coin. After all, saying that the government would need a lot of platinum is like saying a $100 bill needs to have 100 times as much cotton in it as a $1 bill. Nobody would be able to fit them into their wallets., Finally, we have to ask:, Note: It's probably obvious, but that's not a scientific survey of public opinion. It's just a question., Update at 11:30 a.m. ET. A Video Explainer:, Business Insider has done both a story and a video to explain what this is all about. Later today, Business Insider deputy editor Joe Weisenthal is due to talk about the mythical coin on All Things Considered. Click here to find an NPR station that broadcasts or streams the show.
Jack Lew has been nominated to be the next Treasury secretary., Jack Lew has been nominated to be the next Treasury secretary., Saying he cannot think of a better person to take the job, President Obama this afternoon formally announced he is nominating Jacob Jack Lew, his chief of staff, to be the next Treasury secretary., Word of Obama's decision to tap Lew, who previously served as budget director in the Obama and Clinton administration, broke Wednesday., Jack has my complete trust, Obama said., Jacob Jack Lew's signature, on the 2012 Mid-Session Review of the federal budget. He was director of the Office of Management and Budget at the time., Jacob Jack Lew's signature, on the 2012 Mid-Session Review of the federal budget. He was director of the Office of Management and Budget at the time., Of Geithner, the president said, when the history books are written, Tim Geithner's going to go down as one of the finest secretaries of the Treasury. When they came to office in 2009, Obama said, the nation was in the midst of a financial crisis, bank after bank was on the verge of collapse and 800,000 jobs had been lost in one month. I couldn't blame Tim when he tried to tell me he wasn't the right guy for the job, Obama joked., Lew said he looks forward to the challenge of being Treasury secretary, and made a joking reference to his unusual signature (which we posted about Wednesday). We both share a common challenge in penmanship, he said to Geithner., Then, at the end of the event, the president got in his own dig at Lew's loopy John Handcock., I'd never noticed Jack's signature, he said, until it was highlighted yesterday in the press. I considered rescinding [the nomination]. But, Obama added, Lew has promised to work on at least making one letter legible in order not to debate our currency.
Traders work on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange Jan. 2. Financial market participants will be keeping a close eye on upcoming deadlines affecting the U.S. debt ceiling, scheduled automatic budget cuts and federal funding., Traders work on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange Jan. 2. Financial market participants will be keeping a close eye on upcoming deadlines affecting the U.S. debt ceiling, scheduled automatic budget cuts and federal funding., Maybe you were hoping you'd never hear the phrase fiscal cliff again after Congress passed legislation Jan. 1 to address that tax-break-expiration deadline., Sorry., Three more cliff-type deadlines are fast approaching. They involve: 1) raising the federal debt ceiling 2) modifying automatic, across-the-board spending cuts and 3) funding the government to avert a shutdown., The deadlines all hit between Valentine's Day and Easter, which means new rounds of chaotic congressional negotiations may start up just after the Jan. 21 presidential inauguration parade ends., Indeed, President Obama's choice for his second-term Treasury secretary is a budget-battle warrior, Jack Lew. During his first term, Obama chose a banking expert, Tim Geithner, to head the Treasury Department. Now Obama needs a budget expert like Lew, the former head of the Office of Management and Budget, to lead the White House negotiations with Congress., January 10, 2013, January 9, 2013, To understand why this winter may be so bitter in Washington, let's take a look at each of the cliffs those dates when Congress could tip the U.S. economy over into recession or worse., But first, refresh your hazy New Year's Eve memories. The first big cliff that Congress averted involved the Dec. 31 expiration of Bush-era income tax breaks. On Jan. 1, Congress passed legislation to ensure that 99 percent of income taxpayers would not see any changes in the new year and beyond., Now, welcome to the next cliffs., The Debt Ceiling. This one comes first, and poses the greatest danger to the economy. If Congress fails to act by the middle of February, Wall Street analysts say, financial markets could crash and trigger a global depression., The roots of the problem go back to 1939 when Congress set a limit on how much debt the Treasury could issue. Since then, the country's population has been expanding, inflation rising and debt growing. So time and again, Congress has needed to bump up the debt ceiling., In all, Congress has raised the debt cap more than 100 times under both Democrats and Republicans. For example, during the Reagan years, lawmakers boosted the limit 18 times., But today, many Republicans, alarmed by the nation's ever-rising debt of $16.4 trillion, are insisting that Congress cut spending rather than borrow more., The current debt ceiling was actually hit just as 2012 came to an end. Since then, the Treasury has been using extraordinary measures to keep paying whatever is owed to investors who hold U.S. debt instruments. But the department will run out of accounting tricks as early as mid-February., Unless the debt ceiling can be raised by then, Treasury will have to find new and painful ways to raise money to avoid default. So, for example, it could stop sending Americans their Social Security checks, veterans' benefits, income tax refunds and food stamps. Such moves would be extremely unpopular but perhaps less damaging than the alternative., Whenever a nation fails to repay its lenders, interest rates spike, stock and bond markets fall sharply, the value of the currency declines dramatically, and the country quickly falls into a deep recession, said economist Robert Shapiro, co-founder of Sonecon LLC., Obama says the matter is nonnegotiable. One thing I will not compromise over is whether or not Congress should pay the tab for a bill they've already racked up, Obama said in his weekly radio address., But Senate Republican leader Mitch McConnell, speaking on NBC Sunday, suggested that Republicans might be willing to see the nation default to force spending cuts. It's a shame we have to use whatever leverage we have in Congress to get the president to deal with the biggest problem confronting our future, and that's our excessive spending, he said., The last time the government faced a debt-ceiling crisis, in August 2011, Republicans agreed to raise the borrowing limit only after putting into place automatic, across-the-board spending cuts set to take effect in 2013. That brings us to the next cliff ..., Sequestration. During that 2011 debt-ceiling battle, lawmakers set up the so-called sequestration process to impose $109 billion in spending cuts each year for a decade unless they could agree on a deficit-reduction plan by the end of 2012. Such a plan never came together., Instead, on Jan. 1, Congress pushed the sequestration deadline to March 1. Unless Congress takes new action, the automatic spending cuts would kick in and likely cause enormous job losses, especially among Pentagon contractors., Sequestration could be expected to result in layoffs or reductions in force for about half a million of those employees. But because of the uncertainty that we are likely to continue to face with respect to which contract will be affected and by how much, layoff notices may likely be sent to several times that number of people, according to a report by the Center for American Progress, a research group., Congressional Budget. Each year, Congress is supposed to pass a budget that sets spending priorities. The GOP-led House passes budgets annually, but only ones that Senate Democrats would never approve. Because of the partisan stalemate, Congress has not completed a budget since April 2009. Instead, lawmakers pass short-term continuing resolutions to keep government running., The current resolution expires March 27. Congress must pass a new one or the government will have to shut down its nonessential functions, such as building roads, running national parks and supporting medical research., Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, in a recent op-ed for the Houston Chronicle, said: It may be necessary to partially shut down the government in order to secure the long-term fiscal well-being of our country, rather than plod along the path of Greece, Italy and Spain.
The offices of JB Marine, a barge cleaning and repair business that is located atop an empty barge just south of St. Louis, now lean at a 30-degree angle because the Mississippi River levels are so low., The Mississippi River has provided George Foster with a living all his life. Now, with the river dropping to historically low levels, it's threatening to take his business down with it., Foster's office sits atop an empty barge on the river, just south of St. Louis. His building tilts at a 30-degree angle because the water is so low. Visitors may want to stick out their fingertips for balance walking down his narrow hallway., Foster is moving his office space to temporary trailers on higher ground, but that's not going to improve general operations at his company, JB Marine Service, which cleans and repairs barges that ply the Mississippi. With traffic so badly reduced, Foster's business has been down about 55 percent for the past three months., From all the indications we're getting from the [Army] Corps of Engineers, it's going to get dramatically worse, Foster says., George Foster, president of JB Marine, says he hasn't had to lay off any of his 110 employees but wonders when he'll see enough barge traffic to keep all of his workers busy. Along the affected stretch of the Mississippi River, some 8,000 jobs are thought to be at risk., The Corps has said its program of blasting rock more than 100 miles south of St. Louis to deepen the riverbed should alleviate the most dire concerns of shippers: that the drought-shrunken river could shut to barge traffic entirely this month., It's a big change from a year ago, when flooding was a bigger concern. But now the Mississippi is about 20 feet lower around St. Louis than it was a year ago, putting at risk 7 million tons of shipping. Mississippi barge traffic carries 60 percent of the country's grain, 22 percent of the oil and gas, and 20 percent of the coal, according to the trade group American Waterways Operators., The low water levels have already had a dramatic impact on shipping, increasing costs and putting thousands of jobs at risk. At some point, it becomes a losing game to run barges that are filled far from capacity in order to keep them from scraping the river's bottom., The cost and time of transport of the river have gone up dramatically, says Richard Calhoun, president of Cargo Carriers, the logistics subsidiary of agricultural products giant Cargill. In some cases, we've been unwilling to sell grain that we don't know we can get from origin to destination., 200 Miles Of Trouble, The Mississippi River extends for more than 2,000 miles from Minnesota on down to Louisiana. The current problems are concentrated within a 200-mile stretch from St. Louis south to Cairo, Ill., North of St. Louis, the Army Corps of Engineers has maintained a lock-and-dam system since the 1930s that keeps the river at navigable levels. Were it not for that system, the river might have shut down between Minnesota and Cairo back in August, says Dennis Wilmsmeyer, executive director of the Tri-City Regional Port District in Granite City, Ill., just north of St. Louis., The lock-and-dam worked marvelously in keeping the Upper Mississippi open, he says. We've been busier than ever., South of Cairo, the Mississippi is replenished by the Ohio River. Butler Miller is president of a barge company based in St. Louis County, but he has diverted much of his fleet to the southern stretches of the river., We can't load in St. Louis, we move to Cairo, Ill., or Greenville, Miss., says Miller. Instead of having 10,000 barges working the whole river system, all of them are working other places, which takes a big cut from profitability., Bigger Than You Think, Barges are a hidden industry, Wilmsmeyer says, a mode of transport the vast majority of Americans has no reason to think about. But they are a crucial means for moving all manner of goods., The river has fallen fast enough that barges have been beached along its banks outside St. Louis., They're sort of like the containers dragged along by trucks, only bigger. Barges heading south along the Mississippi River are likely to be carrying agricultural commodities corn, soybeans, rice that will be loaded onto ships at New Orleans for export., Barges are loaded as they come back north, too. Much of the road salt that the Midwest relies on to keep winter roads open comes from salt mines on an island in Louisiana that can't be accessed by truck or rail. Northbound barges may be carrying petroleum products or the fertilizer farmers start to spread in February., But now there are few barges moving up and down the river. The rock-blasting at Thebes, Ill., should help to keep boats moving, but for the moment, it has cut the window for barge traffic to just eight hours a day., Because channels are narrower, towboats that might typically push 30 barges tied together are now lucky to push 15 or 20. Each of them is loaded more lightly than normal, so they can stay afloat in shallower water., Barges that would normally have 12 feet of goods are now down to 8 feet. The barges are so big that one inch of lost cargo space means you're losing 17 tons of shipped goods per barge., The higher cost of moving commodities could translate into higher food prices. There's not enough trucks in the world to handle all the traffic in barges, says Wilmsmeyer, who is also the president of the trade association Inland Rivers, Ports and Terminals., Praying For Rain, People working along the Mississippi greet one another by saying, You think the river's going to come up some? It's everyone's hope., We're at the mercy of Mother Nature, says Larry Rowe, captain of a JB Marine boat. People along the Mississippi are hoping for significant snowmelt to raise the water levels., Members of Congress along the affected stretch of the river have been lobbying the Obama administration to release more water from the Missouri River, which flows into the Mississippi just north of St. Louis. So far, they've had no luck., Instead, people have to hope for significant snowmelt. But the drought that damaged crops in the Midwest last summer shows no signs of abating., We're at the mercy of Mother Nature right now, says Larry Rowe, captain of a small JB Marine boat., JB Marine has 110 employees. So far, George Foster hasn't laid anyone off. Across the river from his tilted office, Foster sees fully exposed, 18-foot channel dikes that are normally covered with water and wonders when enough barges are going to come through again to keep all of his people busy., With the river so low, he can't lower his docks far enough to clean the bottoms of barges that do come into the area. Along the affected stretch of the Mississippi River, some 8,000 jobs are thought to be at risk., We're sitting here with four dry docks with nothing to do, Foster says. I have to take a serious look here at personnel, but that's a tough decision.
Yours, for $2,100 a month, Yours, for $2,100 a month, A plain, one-bedroom apartment in Williston, N.D., rents for $2,100 a month. For this price, you could rent a one-bedroom apartment in New York City., Williston is not New York City. There are 30,000 residents and one department store. The nearest city is two hours away., Rents are so high in Williston because the town is in the middle of an oil boom. Unemployment is below 1 percent, and workers are flooding into town., But the workers, by and large, don't want to stay in Williston. The town is full of men who live hundreds of miles away and who have no intention of moving their families to town., For Williston to become a place more people want to call home, it's going to need more stuff. More stores. More restaurants. But with high-paying oil jobs easy to come by, it's hard for stores and restaurants to hire employees., So Williston is in this weird situation. People are reluctant to move here until there are more places like stores and restaurants. But it's hard for those stores to open until there are more people here., It's a chicken-and-egg problem., The town's solution is to build a gigantic chicken. Or maybe it's an egg. Actually, its a huge rec center with a golf simulator, batting cages, tennis courts, swimming pools and a lazy river., That's Williston's solution. Build and build and build. If everything works out, there could be 40,000 oil wells in the area. People will have to stick around to maintain them. Local officials hope those people will settle down and turn Williston into more than a boomtown.
New federal mortgage rules come at a time when regulators and banks are trying to find a middle ground between overly lax and overly tight lending standards., New federal mortgage rules come at a time when regulators and banks are trying to find a middle ground between overly lax and overly tight lending standards., The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau is releasing Thursday much anticipated new mortgage rules, which will restrict the kind of subprime lending practices that caused both the financial and housing sectors to crash five years ago., The new rules come at a time when regulators and banks are trying to find a middle ground between overly lax and overly tight lending standards., About a decade ago, mortgage lenders started broadening their base of customers by offering an array of exotic loan products with esoteric names: subprime, Alt-A, or low-doc loans that required little to no documentation of income. Teaser rates and option ARMs that offered low initial monthly payments that later ballooned., Those loans got millions of borrowers into loans they ultimately couldn't afford, and it resulted in one of the worst crashes in modern history., Reckless Lending, It's important not to forget where we came from, says Richard Cordray, director of the consumer watchdog agency that issued the new rules. We have a financial crisis and a lot of pain and misery in this country that was caused by reckless lending and toxic products that should never have been offered and that this rule will see are never offered again., Cordray says these products are now things of the past., We've gotten tens of thousands of mortgage complaints at this point. A big number of them are people who are in trouble now because of reckless lending practices that occurred before the crisis, he says. If the consumer bureau had been in place 10 years ago, I think none of that would have occurred., The bureau worked with banks and outside groups to hammer out the rules. Among other things, the rules define what are called qualified mortgages. These cap upfront fees at 3 percent of the loan amount, do not balloon over time and limit borrowers' debt payments to less than 43 percent of their pretax income. In exchange, lenders that issue mortgages meeting those standards can reduce their legal liability., Seeking Middle Ground, But these rules come at a time when lending standards have swung the other direction. Many believe it's become too hard for consumers to get mortgages. To try to address that problem and to encourage lenders to find a healthy middle ground, the bureau established an alternative, more permissive definition of qualified mortgage. So, for example, if a borrower's debts exceed the cap by a little, banks will still have some flexibility., By offering a more relaxed standard in the short term, the bureau hopes to give both the banks and consumers time to get through this period of relatively tight credit. The rules will go into effect next January., Susan Wachter, a professor of real estate finance at The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, says the new rules may mean some people will no longer be able to qualify for a mortgage, but those who do will have a much better chance of staying in their homes., The banking industry often talks about the CFPB and its efforts with fear and loathing, but Wachter says the financial crisis demonstrated how all lenders suffer when there are lax lending standards. She says she expects many lenders will therefore throw their weight behind these new rules., The risks were not understood. The risks were not understood by industry itself because the information was not out there, she says. I think the banking industry itself is looking for safety from practices that have proved to be unsafe., The bureau plans to announce another set of mortgage rules next week. Those will govern how lenders must handle loans once they are issued and if they fall delinquent.
Secretary of Labor Hilda Solis, seen here sitting in a new Ford Fusion last September, submitted her resignation to President Obama Wednesday., Secretary of Labor Hilda Solis, seen here sitting in a new Ford Fusion last September, submitted her resignation to President Obama Wednesday., Secretary of Labor Hilda Solis is resigning, opening up one more slot in President Obama's second-term administration. A former member of Congress, Solis was the first Hispanic woman to head a Cabinet-level agency., This afternoon, I submitted my resignation to President Obama, she wrote in a letter to her agency's employees. Growing up in a large Mexican-American family in La Puente, California, I never imagined that I would have the opportunity to serve in a president's Cabinet, let alone in the service of such an incredible leader., Solis said that in the future, she plans to return to California., Prior to becoming Labor Secretary, Solis was a member of the U.S. House of Representatives. In 2000, she became the first woman to receive the John F. Kennedy Profile in Courage Award, for her work on environmental justice while serving in the California state Senate., In October, Solis was moved to defend her agency's work, after a closely watched indicator the U.S. jobless rate fell to 7.8 percent. The news, which came one month before the presidential election, was greeted with suspicion by critics of President Obama., Wednesday afternoon, the president released a statement in which he called Solis a tireless champion for working families., The statement continued, Over the last four years, Secretary Solis has been a critical member of my economic team as we have worked to recover from the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression and strengthen the economy for the middle class., Solis' resignation comes on the same day the president is said to be poised to nominate Jacob Lew for the post of Treasury Secretary. This afternoon, a CNN writer pondered what a second Obama administration will look like, in a piece titled Obama's Cabinet shaping up to be a boys club.
Jack Lew, current White House chief of staff. He's likely to be the nominee for treasury secretary., Jack Lew, current White House chief of staff. He's likely to be the nominee for treasury secretary., Update: At 6 a.m. ET. Jan. 10, White House Announcement:, The White House has officially confirmed that President Obama will nominate his chief of staff, Jacob Jack Lew, to be the next Treasury secretary. According to a statement, the announcement is scheduled for 1:30 p.m. ET today (Thursday)., NPR's Scott Horsley had more about the nomination on Morning Edition., Related post: Signature? Doodle? Check How A Treasury Secretary Lew Might Sign Your Dollars., Our original post: , White House Chief of Staff Jack Lew, as expected, is President Obama's choice to be the next treasury secretary, both Bloomberg News and The Associated Press are reporting., Bloomberg, which broke the story, says it's getting that word from a person familiar with the process and that the announcement will be made Thursday. The AP is citing sources. NPR has not independently confirmed the news., Lew would replace Timothy Geithner, who earlier announced that he wants to leave the administration early in the president's second term., The 57-year-old Lew, as NPR's Mara Liasson reported in December, has had years of experience toiling in the fiscal trenches. ... Before he was White House chief of staff, Lew was Obama's budget director a job he'd also held in the Clinton White House. After serving in the Clinton administration, Lew followed the well-worn path from White House to Wall Street., Bloomberg wraps up his resume this way:, As a former aide to the late House Speaker Tip O'Neill, a Massachusetts Democrat, and a two-time director of the Office of Management and Budget, Lew has experience on both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue. He's spent most of his career in government, with a brief detour to Wall Street, where he worked as a managing director for Citigroup from July 2006 until joining the administration when Obama first took office., The other choices the president has announced for top posts:, &mdash; Sen. John Kerry, D-Mass., to be secretary of state., &mdash; Former Sen. Chuck Hagel, R-Neb., to be secretary of defense., &mdash; Counterterrorism adviser John Brennan to be CIA director.
Manhattan: The headquarters of American International Group Inc. (AIG)., Manhattan: The headquarters of American International Group Inc. (AIG)., Update at 4:50 p.m. ET. AIG Board Confirms Its Stance:, AIG's board of directors say they've rejected calls by Starr International Company to contest part of the federal rescue of AIG in September of 2008., America invested in 62,000 AIG employees, and we kept our promise to rebuild this great company, repay every dollar America invested in us, and deliver a profit to those who put their trust in us, Chairman Steve Miller said. To date, AIG has returned $205 billion to America, including a profit of $22.7 billion. We continue to thank America for its support., Update at 3:10 p.m. ET. AIG Won't Join Suit, Wall Street Journal And Associated Press Report:, &mdash; American International Group Inc.'s directors decided Wednesday not to participate in a lawsuit that accuses the U.S. government of taking advantage of the company in its rescue from the financial crisis, according to two people briefed on the decision. (The Wall Street Journal), &mdash; AIG, facing certain backlash, decides not to join shareholder lawsuit against the government. (The Associated Press), Those reports are in line with our preview of the news from earlier today., Our original post; AIG Would Be 'Hard Pressed' To Join Lawsuit Over Its Federal Bailout:, Chutzpah., Outrageous., Furious., Those are just some of the words being used by lawmakers in stories today about the news that directors of American International Group (AIG) are considering whether the company should join a lawsuit against the federal government which, as The Associated Press reminds readers, spent $182 billion to save the insurer from collapse as the American economy teetered on the brink of disaster in 2008., But there are reasons to think that AIG will decline to get involved., The suit, AP writes, was filed in November 2011 by Starr International Co. Inc., the investment firm of former AIG CEO Maurice Greenberg. It contends that the government didn't provide shareholders fair compensation when it took a nearly 80 percent stake in the insurer as part of the bailout. In doing so, the government violated the Constitution, Starr claims., Today, as the Los Angeles Times writes, AIG's directors will consider whether the company should join the plaintiffs., But New York Times business reporter Michael de la Merced, who has been covering the story, told Morning Edition host Steve Inskeep today that the board would be really hard pressed to go ahead and join this lawsuit., From 'Morning Edition', The company, he said, has definitely kept a keen eye on the politics and the public reaction to its bailout. You've got to assume they are very cognizant of what might happen if AIG joined the legal action., The reason AIG directors are at least going to discuss becoming part of the suit, de la Merced said, is that they want to make sure they're carrying out their fiduciary duty to shareholders. Indeed, in a statement AIG says it is the AIG Board's obligation and intention to consider seriously Starr's demand and respond to it in a manner that the Board believes is in the best interest of the Company, taking into account all the relevant circumstances., In recent weeks, the company has been running ads thanking American taxpayers for the bailout. It has reimbursed the government for the bailout. And last month, as the AP notes, the Treasury Department announced ... that it sold all of its remaining shares of AIG, ending up with $22.7 billion more than it funneled to the company during the height of the financial crisis.
A Japan Airlines Boeing 787 Dreamliner jet aircraft is surrounded by emergency vehicles while parked at a Terminal E gate at Logan International Airport in Boston on Monday. A small electrical fire filled the cabin of the JAL aircraft with smoke about 15 minutes after it landed in Boston., A Japan Airlines Boeing 787 Dreamliner jet aircraft is surrounded by emergency vehicles while parked at a Terminal E gate at Logan International Airport in Boston on Monday. A small electrical fire filled the cabin of the JAL aircraft with smoke about 15 minutes after it landed in Boston., A fuel leak Tuesday on a Tokyo-bound Japan Airlines flight forced the Boeing 787 Dreamliner aircraft to cancel takeoff and return to the gate at Boston's Logan International Airport. It was the second incident involving a Dreamliner in two days., Here's how Logan airport described the incident on its Facebook page:, Massport crews are on the airfield containing a fuel leak from an outbound Japan Airlines flight to Tokyo. The venting of fuel has stopped. The flight will return to the gate and be evaluated further at that time., The flight later took off en route to Tokyo. Reuters reported that the National Transportation Safety Board won't investigate the fuel leak because there was no accident., Tuesday's incident follows a small fire on a parked Japan Airlines Dreamliner on Monday. No passengers or crew were onboard at the time. The NTSB said one investigator was already on the scene to investigate the fire and two others were on their way to Boston., Here's more from the NTSB about Monday's incident:, The NTSB investigator on scene found that the auxiliary power unit battery had severe fire damage. Thermal damage to the surrounding structure and components is confined to the area immediately near the APU battery rack (within about 20 inches) in the aft electronics bay., NPR's Tovia Smith reported on Monday's fire for our Newscast Unit. She notes that the Dreamliner has had several other electrical problems, as well as an engine failure and fuel leaks the Dreamliners have suffered since the new jet model came into service just over a year ago., The Wall Street Journal reported Tuesday that United Airlines found improperly installed wiring on one of its Boeing 787s during an inspection after Monday's incident at Logan., On Dec. 5, 2012, the Federal Aviation Administration issued an airworthiness directive for the Dreamliner. Here's what the directive said:, We have received reports of fuel leaks on two different in-service airplanes, and the subsequent discovery of several improperly assembled engine fuel feed manifold couplings on in-service and production airplanes. The improper coupling installations, which occurred during production, have included couplings with missing or improperly installed lockwire, parts within the couplings installed in the wrong locations, incorrect parts installed in the couplings, and couplings that have extra parts installed. These conditions, if not corrected, could result in fuel leaks, which could lead to fuel exhaustion, engine power loss or shutdown, or leaks on hot engine parts that could lead to a fire., The aircraft has had a bumpy ride even before it was airborne, as noted in an NPR story by Wendy Kaufman. She noted that the 787 has produced a lot of headaches from the outset. And we also reported on the 787's first commercial flight on October 2011. But as we noted at the time, the reviews for the plane were glowing.
U.S. employers added 155,000 jobs in December, a steady gain that shows hiring held up during the tense negotiations to resolve the fiscal cliff. But the unemployment rate remained at 7.8 percent last month., U.S. employers added 155,000 jobs in December, a steady gain that shows hiring held up during the tense negotiations to resolve the fiscal cliff. But the unemployment rate remained at 7.8 percent last month., Businesses complained that the uncertainty surrounding the fiscal cliff froze their decisions about hiring and expanding, which hurt the economy. Washington has now managed half a deal, which settles tax issues, at least for the time being. But has that removed enough uncertainty to boost some business hiring and investment?, Vickers Engineering in New Troy, Mich., makes parts for auto companies, agriculture equipment manufacturers and the oil and gas industry. Scott Dawson, the company's chief financial officer, says the fiscal cliff deal on taxes helped his company move forward, by extending a provision that allows firms to rapidly deduct the value of new equipment from their tax bill., Now we can invest in more equipment, which allows us to take on more projects, which allows us to hire more people, he says. That was one of the things that really we were waiting until they came to this agreement on how we were going to pursue our capital plans for 2013., However, Vickers Engineering was already in an expansion mode, riding the revival of the auto industry. It has almost doubled its annual revenues to $30 million in the past two years. The fiscal cliff agreement will help the company complete a near doubling of its workforce by the end of this year., But Dawson says another part the deal, the tax hike for people making over $450,000 a year, could be a drag. That's because Vickers' owners will pay more in taxes and have less money to invest in new equipment., Dyke Messinger runs a small company called Power Curbers in Salisbury, N.C., which builds machines used to construct curbs and gutters for streets and highways. Messinger says he is ready to hire three or four workers., But the reason Messinger is hiring is not the fiscal cliff deal but rather that the construction industry is getting back on its feet. The economy has strengthened enough in the construction sector that we can foresee increased business, which will allow us to bump up hiring, bump up our spending on a variety of things that we were holding back on before, Messinger says., Scott Shane, a professor of entrepreneurial studies at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, says the situation at Power Curbers underscores that what is most important to small businesses is what is happening in their sector of the economy., You know, if demand is strong and the economy is growing and people are demanding products and services, then they feel confident on expanding and when that's not happening they don't feel confident, he says., Shane says if you're not confident in the underlying economy, removing a little uncertainty about the government's fiscal situation may not be the answer to your problems., Government contractors, especially in defense, may have the greatest uncertainty right now, says Stan Soloway of the Professional Services Council, an association of government contractors. For the most part, I think what we're seeing are companies being very, very conservative and very, very disciplined in terms of their investments in people and in technology and so forth, he says., What these companies want, Soloway says, is for policymakers to proceed with the second step in the fiscal cliff, cutting government spending even if it means some pain for them., Rip the Band-Aid off and let's deal with this, he says. If there's going to be substantially reduced spending, which we all expect, at least let's get it on the table, know what's coming so we can plan against it. That's when you'll start to see normalcy and investment decisions start to move forward., But most analysts expect negotiations over spending cuts and the debt ceiling will once again go right down to the wire.
A man enters a UBS bank in Hong Kong last month. The Swiss banking giant agreed in 2009 to identify the names of its U.S. account holders, part of a push by banking regulators to make it harder to hide income., A man enters a UBS bank in Hong Kong last month. The Swiss banking giant agreed in 2009 to identify the names of its U.S. account holders, part of a push by banking regulators to make it harder to hide income., Time was that a Swiss bank account was synonymous with confidentiality and keeping assets from prying eyes. No more., Last week, Switzerland's oldest bank, Wegelin &amp; Co., pleaded guilty in a New York court to helping Americans hide $1.2 billion from the Internal Revenue Service over a decade-long period. Wegelin's plea, and a $57.8 million fine, forced the bank to shut its doors. It follows a $780 million settlement with UBS in 2009 that forced the Swiss banking giant to identify the names of its U.S. account holders., The prosecution of the Swiss banks is part of a U.S.-led international push that has been building for years. It takes advantage of newly enacted U.S. law and freshly negotiated bilateral tax treaties and global protocols., Patricia Brown, an international tax expert and former Treasury Department official who now heads the graduate tax program at the University of Miami School of Law, says the effort is aimed squarely at shutting down offshore tax havens and secret accounts, illegal under U.S. law, ranging from the Caribbean to Europe and Asia., The number of places where people can hide is getting much smaller, says Brown, who was the Treasury Department's deputy international tax counsel between 1999 and 2008. It's getting much harder for countries like Switzerland to thumb their nose at the U.S., Although Switzerland, as the world's largest tax haven, has come in for particular scrutiny, the pressure is also being felt in the Cayman Islands, Barbados, the Bahamas and Singapore, all of which have in the past been prime destinations for secret cash., Stephen Shay, a professor at Harvard University, says the effort to clamp down on secret offshore money gained steam from UBS's illegal activities and the case of Liechtenstein's LGT Group, which was been under investigation since 2008 for allegedly hiding millions of euros on behalf of German tax evaders., The UBS settlement in turn bolstered international efforts to clamp down on tax havens many of which have agreed to undergo review to promote transparency., Congress Clamps Down, In 2010, Congress passed the Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act, or FATCA, that calls for overseas banks to begin full disclosure of U.S. account holders beginning next year. All along, Washington has been pursuing new bilateral treaties to share tax information., Countries are almost universally agreeing to exchange tax information, says Shay, who like Brown is a former high-ranking Treasury official., The signal seems to be that it doesn't matter where you move your money, we can still get you, he says. This signal is being heard not just in Switzerland, but in the Caribbean and the Far East., Meanwhile, the IRS has been encouraging U.S. citizens with undisclosed offshore accounts to come forward, a process known as voluntary disclosure. It's not exactly an amnesty, but the IRS can waive steep penalties that would be levied on top of any back taxes owed, says Scott Michel, an attorney who has represented clients going through voluntary disclosure., He stresses that not all undisclosed offshore accounts are tied to someone who is a tax evader. The account users range from people who are diverting money intentionally to those who simply discover an undisclosed account as part of an inheritance, says Michel of the Washington, D.C.-based law firm Caplin &amp; Drysdale., In any case, it's clear that in the past several years, especially since the start of the Obama administration, that the tax division of the Justice Department and the IRS are clearly focused on the offshore area, Michel says., First UBS and now Wegelin have given them plenty to work with. The government here is a little bit like a cat pulling on a ball of yarn they keep on unraveling evidence that leads them in different directions, he says., With FATCA it's going to get a lot harder for anyone who chooses to forgo the voluntary disclosure route, he says, because U.S. banks will be reluctant to deal with any foreign bank that doesn't comply with new disclosure rules., Every bank anywhere in the world, for the most part, is going to have to start providing the IRS with information about Americans who have accounts at those financial institutions, Michel says., FATCA puts banks in the role of policeman, forcing Americans with money overseas to comply, he says., Bank Secrecy 'Eroding', Bank secrecy is essentially eroding before our eyes, Michel says. I think the combination of the fear factor that has kicked in for not only Americans with money offshore, countries that don't want to be on the wrong side of this issue and the legislative weight of FATCA means that within three to five years it will be exceptionally difficult for any American to hide money in any financial institution., Asked whether the end is near for the tax haven, the University of Miami's Brown laughs. I wouldn't go that far, she says, but I would say there has been progress in the last five years that I would have expected to take 15, at least., Harvard's Shay credits the recent push for greater disclosure partly to the 2008 financial crisis. Lack of transparency at the banks was a major contributing factor to the crisis. Now that governments have leverage to demand changes, they aren't about to give it up., I am hopeful that we are in the process of seeing a sea change, says Shay. You have to keep the pressure on at all times, but we are in a very, very different place than we were pre-UBS.
We don't hear much about bank liquidity, partly because it sounds so dull. It's much more fun to talk about prop trading (fear the London Whale!) or structured finance (synthetic CDOs are crazy!)., But if you're trying to figure out how safe banks are and how willing they'll be to make loans to ordinary people liquidity is at least as important as other, more-dramatic-sounding corners of finance., So the new liquidity rules global banking regulators released yesterday are a big deal for the real economy., Liquidity, in this context, basically means how easy it is to turn stuff you own into cash. Example from ordinary life: Apple stock is very liquid (you can sell it at a moment's notice with no trouble); a house is not very liquid (it could take months to sell and is a huge hassle)., Here's why liquidity is so important for banks., When people start to panic about the financial system, they have a tendency to go to the bank and ask for their money back. This is especially true of big institutions whose money is not protected by deposit insurance., Banks, of course, don't keep huge piles of cash sitting in the vault. Instead, they make loans and buy bonds (which are a kind of loan). If a lot of people want to pull their money out of the bank at the same time, banks typically have to sell off some of those bonds., But not all bonds are created equal. At moments when the finance world seems scary the kind of moments when people start pulling lots of money out of banks no one wants to buy bonds that are backed by questionable mortgages, or bonds sold by heavily indebted companies. Everybody wants to buy really safe bonds, like short-term U.S. government bonds., If you wanted a bank to be really, really liquid, you could say: Take all the money people deposit in your bank, and use it to buy short-term U.S. government bonds. That way, if things get crazy, you can always sell off the bonds and give people their money back., But if banks did this, they wouldn't have any money left over to lend to ordinary people or small businesses or anything. It would be a disaster for the economy., You want banks to hold enough liquid assets to weather a crisis, but not so much that it stifles lending to ordinary people and businesses. And so you end up in the rather unsatisfying universe where lots of bank regulation questions seem to end up, trying to work out the details and figure out which way to move on the spectrum of more restrictive or less restrictive., The liquidity rules released yesterday are significantly less restrictive than what was previously proposed. They're part of a set of global banking rules called Basel III (here's a Planet Money story on the Basel rules)., The rules were initially supposed to kick in in 2015; instead, they will be phased in gradually and won't fully take effect until 2019. And rather than being restricted to government bonds and other supersafe assets, banks will now be allowed to count some riskier assets toward their liquidity requirements., Banks had pushed for the liquidity rules to be looser than those described in the initial proposal. arguing that looser rules would allow them to make more loans, which would help the economy. That's likely to be true. Banks are, after all, still in the business of making loans; they make more money lending money to ordinary people than they do buying government bonds., At the same time, there will surely come another day when people start to panic again about the health of the world's banks, and big institutions rush to pull their money out. The looser liquidity rules mean the banks will be in a much riskier position when that day comes especially if it comes before 2019, when the new rules fully take effect.
April 2011: A foreclosure sign in front of a home in Richmond, Calif., April 2011: A foreclosure sign in front of a home in Richmond, Calif., Ten of the nation's major mortgage servicing companies, including household names such as Bank of America and Citibank, have agreed to pay $8.5 billion to resolve claims that they abused some homeowners when they foreclosed on mortgages during the recent housing crisis, the Federal Reserve and the Comptroller of the Currency announced late Monday morning., According to the Fed, $3.3 billion of the settlement will be direct payments to eligible borrowers and $5.2 billion will go toward other assistance, such as loan modifications and forgiveness of deficiency judgments., It adds that eligible borrowers are expected to receive compensation ranging from hundreds of dollars up to $125,000, depending on the type of possible servicer error., Along with BofA and Citi, the companies in the agreement are: Aurora, JPMorgan Chase, MetLife Bank, PNC, Sovereign, SunTrust, U.S. Bank, and Wells Fargo., The New York Times, which last night broke the news that the settlement was about to be announced, writes that the deal should resolve claims of foreclosure abuses that included flawed paperwork used in foreclosures and bungled loan modifications. ... The settlement concludes weeks of feverish negotiations between the federal regulators, led by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the banks, and will end a troubled foreclosure review mandated by the banking regulators., Earlier today, Bank of America agreed to pay the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) $3.6 billion in cash and will to buy back $6.75 billion worth of mortgage-backed securities to resolve claims related to securities sold to Fannie Mae by the bank and Countrywide Financial Corp. (which BofA acquired in 2008).
Bank of America's corporate center in Charlotte, N.C., Bank of America's corporate center in Charlotte, N.C., Bank of America announced this morning that it will pay the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) $3.6 billion in cash and will buy back $6.75 billion worth of mortgages to resolve claims related to mortgage-backed securities sold to Fannie Mae by the bank and Countrywide Financial Corp. (which BofA acquired in 2008., As Planet Money has explained before, during the housing boom, banks sold investors bundles of mortgages that were shoddier than promised, according to lawsuits the federal government has filed. Now, BofA is resolving the claims against it from Fannie Mae., Word about Bank of America's settlement with Fannie Mae comes as The New York Times reports that a $10 billion settlement to resolve claims of foreclosure abuses by 14 major lenders is expected to be announced as early as Monday, several people with knowledge of the discussions said on Sunday. ... An estimated $3.75 billion of the $10 billion is to be distributed in cash relief to Americans who went through foreclosure in 2009 and 2010, these people said. An additional $6 billion is to be directed toward homeowners in danger of losing their homes after falling behind on their monthly payments. All 14 banks , including JPMorgan Chase, Bank of America and Citigroup, are expected to sign on., Update at 9:45 a.m. ET. Statements From Fannie Mae And The Federal Housing Finance Agency:, In a statement, Bradley Lerman, executive vice president and general counsel of Fannie Mae, says that a favorable resolution of this long-standing dispute between Fannie Mae and Bank of America is in the best interest of taxpayers. Fannie Mae has diligently pursued repurchases on loans that did not meet our standards at the time of origination, and we are pleased to have reached an appropriate agreement to collect on these repurchase requests., The Federal Housing Finance Agency regulates Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and the 12 Federal Home Loan Banks. Its acting director, Edward J. DeMarco, says in a statement that resolving these issues at this time is in the best interest of taxpayers and reduces uncertainty in the nation's mortgage finance market. This is a major step forward in resolving issues from the past and providing greater certainty in the marketplace, which remain critical FHFA goals as conservator.
This product image released by Starbucks shows the Rodarte design Starbucks gift card, part of a series of limited-edition products for the holiday season. The card is one of several Rodarte-designed items including tote bags, cup sleeves and mugs. The signature pattern features a pixelated checkerboard of gray, white and silver set against different shades of green., This product image released by Starbucks shows the Rodarte design Starbucks gift card, part of a series of limited-edition products for the holiday season. The card is one of several Rodarte-designed items including tote bags, cup sleeves and mugs. The signature pattern features a pixelated checkerboard of gray, white and silver set against different shades of green., Starbucks netted a record $13.3 billion in 2012. But it isn't immune to competition, so the global coffee seller has updated interiors, offered more products and even tapped into couture fashion., In this film publicity file image released by Fox Searchlight, Natalie Portman is shown in a scene from Black Swan. Fashionistas flipped over the film's forward-thinking ballet costumes by Rodarte, sisters Laura and Kate Mulleavy., In this film publicity file image released by Fox Searchlight, Natalie Portman is shown in a scene from Black Swan. Fashionistas flipped over the film's forward-thinking ballet costumes by Rodarte, sisters Laura and Kate Mulleavy., It recently sold several items designed by the small fashion house Rodarte, including a to-go tumbler for $12.95., Founded in 2005 by Kate and Laura Mulleavy, Rodarte made a name for itself in the 2010 film Black Swan. Actress Natalie Portman's award-winning portrayal of a ballerina was made even more memorable by her edgy, artsy costumes designed by Rodarte. Neither Rodarte nor Starbucks would comment for this story., Starbucks is just the latest mass retailer to jump on this designer trend. Joshua Thomas, a spokesperson for Target, says his company has now worked with more than 100 designers., It always starts with the customer at Target, Thomas says. What have they been receptive to in the past? Where are they at currently?, The retailer started offering lower-priced versions of designer fashions called Go International in 2006. Suddenly, everyday shoppers could buy clothes by names they had read about on fashion blogs and in magazines. Many of the clothes would sell out on the first day. Target's Thomas says it's about staying current., We try to one-up ourselves try to make it new, try to make it fresh, Thomas says., One partnership that didn't work out as well as others was Target's holiday pairing with upscale retailer Neiman Marcus., Britt Beemer, who studies consumer behavior at America's Research Group, says a high-end name isn't a sure thing., Designers and sisters Kate (left) and Laura Mulleavy acknowledge the audience after the Rodarte fall 2012 collection show during Fashion Week last February in New York., Designers and sisters Kate (left) and Laura Mulleavy acknowledge the audience after the Rodarte fall 2012 collection show during Fashion Week last February in New York., When you bring in an outside designer to do something, it's not their name, it's the product, the look, the design and the merchandising, he says., Target regulars, Beemer says, didn't think the products warranted the higher prices., Some Starbucks drinkers are also price conscious. Last year, Beemer says, a lot of people said they cut out trips to Starbucks to save money., I'm sure they've lost some volume because of consumers cutting back, so they say, 'OK, how can I sell more to my customers I currently have?' Beemer says., But what's in it for designers? They get money and an introduction to a larger buying public., But Rodarte clothes aren't easy to find, and industry watchers say the company has yet to find a sustainable market for its artful line. Still, the name has cachet with a certain type of customer., Target employee Grace Brace, 26, of Minneapolis says the collection didn't make her go to Starbucks any more than usual. But while there, she contemplated buying a mug., I almost did yesterday but I didn't, and the store is out of them so I can't today, Brace says., Unfortunately for Brace, the entire collection has sold out at the Minneapolis Starbucks she patronizes.
Aspen trees tower overhead in Chequamegon-Nicolet National Forest in northern Wisconsin., Aspen trees tower overhead in Chequamegon-Nicolet National Forest in northern Wisconsin., Butch Johnson saved 300 jobs in his community when he reopened Flambeau River Papers in Park Falls, Wis., Butch Johnson saved 300 jobs in his community when he reopened Flambeau River Papers in Park Falls, Wis., In 2009 China surpassed the U.S. as a paper producer. As the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reports, China has several advantages over the declining American paper industry. , Deep in the Northwoods of Wisconsin, lumberjacks still cry timber, just not as often as they once did. Across the state, milling lumber into good paper, the kind called knowledge grade for books, has employed thousands for more than a century, and created a distinct culture., Then about six years ago, the mills started closing as a result of the twin threat of the iPad and China. Still, some hearty souls are surviving through grit and attitude., Paper Cuts is the name of a series done last month by the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel with support from the Pulitzer Center on Crisis Reporting. Reporter John Schmid spoke with Jacki Lyden, host of weekends on All Things Considered, about his findings., On the history of papermaking in Wisconsin, There is a town called Hayward, Wis., where you can still go for the annual August international lumberjack competition. The entire reason that Wisconsin became the nation's leading papermaking state is because it's got the natural resources that you need for making paper. It's got a lot of rivers, which you need to power the mills. In a town called Appleton ... they made the world's first operating hydroelectric dam to power the paper mills. And you've got hardwood forests, which have been a blessing for the industry in northern Wisconsin. ... These yield these fine, tough fibers that are great for books, magazines, encyclopedias. That's what Wisconsin specialized in for over 100 years., On paper surviving the beginning of the digital age, A joke began to circulate in Wisconsin: 'This paperless society sure is good for business.' Amazing, astonishingly, the paper industry demand held up right around 2005, 2006. There is a beautiful old, 120-year-old mill on the Wisconsin River in a town called Nekoosa. It has to work extra shifts to make the paper for the recent biography of Steve Jobs by Walter Isaacson. The irony, of course, is that no industrialist has done more than Steve Jobs to create the touch screens that are putting the pressure on these paper mills., On one surviving mill owner, Butch Johnson, Butch Johnson is a second-generation logger, dyed in the wool, northern Wisconsinite. He is from the town called Hayward. ... One of the first questions we asked was, 'Have any of these mills that have closed down reopened?' There was just one. That's in Park Falls. Butch grew up there. It is the biggest employer in all the county. ... He saved the town. As soon as the mill closed down and the pink slips went out, the anecdotes that I had heard was that just about every other house on some blocks had put up a 'for sale' sign, and you could just see the town economy begin to collapse., Banks didn't want to extend loans to Butch. ... So he scrapped together a fairly complicated deal. It did involve some state subsidies from the state of Wisconsin, and he had the mill back up and running within a couple of months of closing. Butch will be the first to admit that they might be the next mill to close., On following the paper trail to China, No one expected them to dominate the industry that's just not sexy an industry that is so 18th century. What China has had for so many decades were these quaint, old, highly polluting mills that made flimsy paper out of things like straw and reeds and bamboo. It began to strategically nurture a paper industry. In China, in the classroom, they learn about the four great inventions: They included paper, printer. ... It is a potent national symbol, and China felt like it was claiming an industry that belonged to China in the first place., On Chinese paper subsidies, It's not just subsidies that the Chinese have used as a competitive advantage. They are an innovation economy. They have had to compensate for a chronic timber deficit. They are crossbreeding and hybridizing and cloning species of trees that can grow to full height in four to six years. ... I think the greatest innovation that the Chinese have come up with, however, is that they have created the biggest and most efficient recycling scheme in the world. They scour the planet, literally, for recycled paper, which they then de-ink and re-pulp. The biggest supplier is the United States of America. Not only is Wisconsin losing an industry, but for all of its economic might, the biggest U.S. export is junk that we throw away.
Alecia Warthen, 43, has been unemployed since April. She says she's applied for more than 100 jobs and has received only four interviews and no offers., Alecia Warthen, 43, has been unemployed since April. She says she's applied for more than 100 jobs and has received only four interviews and no offers., The latest figures show December was another month of steady, moderate job growth. But for many people still struggling with long-term unemployment, the situation hasn't actually changed much at all., For Alecia Warthen, the last eight months have been painfully stagnant., She was the first person in her family to finish college, after growing up in one of the roughest sections of Brooklyn. She had earned an accounting degree and worked as a bookkeeper for most of the last decade., Then she lost her job with the City of New York last April, and she's now telling local grocery stores she'll do anything for a job mop floors, stock shelves, bag groceries., One morning she stopped by a Foodtown grocery store in the Bronx. She put in an application a few weeks before, but hadn't heard back. The man she spoke with immediately shook his head at her inquiry., They just closed one of my other Foodtown stores, and we're absorbing their help right now. So I have nothing open, he said., This is sad. This is so sad. Warthen said as she made her way back through the doors. I'm going back home. Enough., Warthen says she's applied for more than 100 jobs since her layoff and has had only four interviews so far. She's tried making clothes and curtains to sell until her sewing machine broke. She even peddled homemade body lotions and home-cooked meals. But nothing's helped., One Of Millions, It wasn't supposed to be this way. Warthen, 43, is used to taking care of her own problems. She raised six kids in the Bronx as a single mom and always had a job. Now, she and the three children who are still in the house are living on food stamps and $400 a week in unemployment insurance., I've always tried to aim high for myself, says Warthen, perched on her 11-year-old daughter's small, pink bed. Instill the same values in my kids and stuff, and just to think that everything has come down to this makes you feel like you just went to school for nothing. For nothing., Warthen is one of about 4.8 million people who are known as the long-term unemployed, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. These individuals have been out of work for 27 weeks or more. So many jobless workers fall into this category almost 40 percent of all unemployed people that the average period a person in the U.S. stays unemployed is about 40 weeks., And it's been that way for a year and a half. So even though the unemployment rate is coming down, the length of time people remain unemployed continues to be pretty high., Remember, prior to 2007, this average duration was more like 20 weeks, not 40 weeks, so we're dealing with a very, very different kind of labor market than we did prior to 2007, says John Silvia, chief economist at Wells Fargo., Missing The Skill Set, Silvia says there are expanding sectors in this new labor market, like health care and education. But he says the main reason people are staying unemployed is a skill-set gap. Those growing sectors need skills many long-term unemployed people just don't have, especially those in their 40s and 50s., Bonny Williams helps run New York Staffing Services, a job-placement center in Manhattan. He's found that the longer someone remains unemployed, the more that person will be perceived as someone without the right skills., It does look undesirable ... from an employer perspective, Williams says. They'd rather spend the time with someone who's just coming off an assignment because they're looking as though they're job-ready, versus someone who may have been a bit stale being out of work for some time., Williams says even though he is placing more workers these days, the people first in line to get the new jobs are the ones who've been out of work the shortest time., That means prospects continue to look dim for people like Warthen. She has already started to pull money out of both her life insurance policy and retirement account. To save on electricity now, her house goes pitch black every night before 11 p.m.
The health care sector added 45,000 jobs in December and is expected to see continued growth this year, economists say., The health care sector added 45,000 jobs in December and is expected to see continued growth this year, economists say., If you're searching for work in this new year, the Labor Department's final jobs report for 2012 suggests: The trend is your friend in 2013., The jobs outlook is actually pretty positive, said John Challenger, chief executive officer of Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas, an employment consulting firm., Challenger said that, after 34 straight months of job growth, the positive trend is well established and likely to continue. The Labor Department said Friday that in December, employers added 155,000 jobs, in line with economists' forecasts. Though the pace is less than robust, its steadiness is reassuring, especially given recent events, he said., As 2012 wound down, the economy had to absorb the impact of both Hurricane Sandy and the fiscal-cliff uncertainty in Washington. And yet economists don't see much evidence that either the winds from the Atlantic Ocean or the hot air from Capitol Hill were strong enough to blow out the recovery., When we look back over the last 12 months, we see it's not much different from 2011, said Nigel Gault, chief U.S. economist with IHS Global Insight, a forecasting firm. That steadiness represents moderate improvement in the U.S. economy, he said., It's disappointing compared with previous recoveries when jobs snapped back more quickly, Gault noted. But the pace has been good enough to suggest that in 2013, many job seekers will land paychecks, he said., Challenger agreed, and spotted another good sign: Layoffs have been really light lately., Companies did a lot of heavy cutting in the recession, but now they are holding onto their people, Challenger said. If you are in a job today, you are relatively safe., In the year ahead, many of those current job holders will retire as large numbers of baby boomers age out of the workforce, he said. The outlook is better than people give it credit for because the boomers are retiring, he said., Both Challenger and Gault agreed that in the new year, the health-care sector will continue its role as the top job generator. The Labor Department said that in December, employers added 45,000 medical-related jobs., Health care, as usual, was one good place to be in 2012, Gault said., The leisure and hospitality industries also have been growing, with restaurants and drinking places adding 38,000 workers last month., These aren't high-paying jobs, Gault said. But they do reflect the economic recovery. People felt they could afford to spend a little more money on eating out and taking vacations, he said., Challenger said that besides health-care workers and waiters, the people with good prospects in 2013 include people with core skills, like accountants and engineers, and blue-collar workers who have been trained as welders, pipe fitters and truck drivers., The Labor Department report showed that over both 2011 and 2012, monthly job increases averaged 153,000. In December, the unemployment rate held steady at 7.8 percent the same as the November rate, following a tenth-of-a-point upward revision., The pace of improvement may feel painfully slow for the more than 12 million people still seeking work in the aftermath of the Great Recession. But it's been fast enough to whittle down the jobless rate from its October 2009 peak of 10 percent., Challenger urges job seekers to stay optimistic. This was a deep and difficult recession, so it's taking a long time to pull out of it, he said. But we're plodding along.
Looking for work: The scene at a diversity job fair in Manhattan last month., Looking for work: The scene at a diversity job fair in Manhattan last month., There were 155,000 jobs added to public and private payrolls in December, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported Friday morning., That's right in line with economists' expectations and is another sign of steady, though modest, growth in employment. In November, employers added an estimated 161,000 jobs. The average monthly gain in 2012 was 153,000 jobs, BLS says. That's the same average as in 2011., Meanwhile, the nation's unemployment rate held steady at 7.8 percent in December BLS revised the November jobless rate, which it first estimated was 7.7 percent, to 7.8 percent. In December 2011, the unemployment rate stood at 8.5 percent., We'll have more on the report and reactions to it as the morning continues, so be sure to hit your refresh button to see our latest updates., Update at 9:45 a.m. ET. White House And GOP Reaction:, &mdash; While more work remains to be done, today's employment report provides further evidence that the U.S. economy is continuing to heal from the wounds inflicted by the worst downturn since the Great Depression. It is critical that we continue the policies that are building an economy that works for the middle class as we dig our way out of the deep hole that was caused by the severe recession that began in December 2007. (Allan Krueger, chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers), &mdash; Too many Americans are still out of work and Washington has too much debt. Our oversized and overspent federal government is a drag on economic growth and job creation, and has burdened every American with a $50,000 share of its debt, and rising. This is the year we need to work together to solve these problems. In the coming months, the House will pass real spending cuts, meaningful reforms of the entitlement programs that are driving us deeper into debt, and a fairer, cleaner tax code. These are the keys to unleashing robust job growth and securing a better future for our children. (House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, in a statement released by his office.), Meanwhile, stocks are little changed in early trading on Wall Street., Update at 9:15 a.m. ET. Where Jobs Were Added., According to BLS:, &mdash; Health care employment continued to expand in December (+45,000)., &mdash; In December, employment in food services and drinking places rose by 38,000., &mdash; Construction added 30,000 jobs in December., &mdash; Manufacturing employment rose by 25,000., &mdash; Employment in retail trade changed little in December, after increasing by 143,000 over the prior 3 months., Update at 8:55 a.m. ET. Some Early Analyses:, &mdash; This may be one of the most boring jobs reports in recent memory. The numbers were basically in line with expectations, stock futures are essentially flat and the report likely won't have much sway on what the Fed's thinking when it comes to future stimulus. (The Wall Street Journal), &mdash; The pace of hiring by U.S. employers eased slightly in December, pointing to a lackluster pace of economic growth that was unable to make further inroads in the country's still high unemployment rate. (Reuters), &mdash; Employers added workers in December at about the same pace as the prior month, and the unemployment rate matched a four-year low, showing sustained gains in the U.S. labor market even as lawmakers were struggling to reach a budget deal. (Bloomberg News), Update at 8:50 a.m. ET. No Revisions To Jobless Rates That Drew Questions:, In the midst of the presidential campaign, when BLS reported in early October that the September jobless rate was 7.8 percent vs. 8.1 percent the month before, some of the Obama administration's critics wondered whether that number was true or not., In today's report, BLS says the September figure still stands at 7.8 percent., Update at 8:45 a.m. ET. For The Year:, &mdash; The jobless rate edged down from 8.5 percent in December 2011., &mdash; Public and private employers together added 1.84 million jobs to their payrolls., &mdash; The employment growth was all in the private sector: 1.9 million jobs. Government agencies shed more than 60,000 jobs.
The scene at a job fair in San Mateo, Calif., earlier this year., The scene at a job fair in San Mateo, Calif., earlier this year., 8:35 a.m. ET. And the answer is: 155,000 jobs added to payrolls in December; the jobless rate held at 7.8 percent. (November's rate was revised up to 7.8 percent.), Our original post:, Here it comes the always eagerly anticipated news about jobs and the nation's unemployment rate., What are we likely to hear at 8:30 a.m. ET when the Bureau of Labor Statistics releases its figures for December?, As NPR's Yuki Noguchi explained on Morning Edition, economists think BLS will say the unemployment rate held steady at 7.7 percent and that about 150,000 jobs were added to public and private payrolls. If they're right, then the jobless rate came down from 8.5 percent a year earlier and employers added about 2 million jobs in 2012., The unemployment's recent peak came in October 2009, when it hit 10 percent., If there is a surprise in this morning's report, it could be on the up side. MarketWatch rounds up some of the recent signals including Thursday's ADP National Employment that said private payrolls grew by 215,000 in December and concludes that the odds of a loftier employment report than what's expected have gone up., And better-than-expected news, MarketWatch adds, could send stocks up sharply later today. Of course, disappointing news could send stocks the other direction., From 'Morning Edition': NPR's Yuki Noguchi previews the jobs report, We'll update with news from the BLS report and reactions to it., For another angle on the employment news, see Planet Money's post: Five Years Of A Brutal Job Market, In Two Graphs.
Matt Damon's character in the movie Promised Land comes to town to convince a landowner to allow a gas company to drill on his property., Matt Damon's character in the movie Promised Land comes to town to convince a landowner to allow a gas company to drill on his property., There is plenty in the movie Promised Land that will prompt energy industry insiders to roll their eyes. But the overall issues explored in the film, which is being widely released in theaters Friday, are very real., A process called hydraulic fracturing has led to drilling booms that are transforming rural communities into industrial zones. Hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, makes it possible to tap into natural gas reservoirs deep underground. But first, gas companies have to convince landowners to allow them to drill., The Natural Gas Pitch, In the film, pitching the fracking process is the job of Matt Damon's character, Steve Butler., I'm not selling them natural gas, I'm selling them the only way they have to get back, he says in the film., Like the real-life industry, Damon's character argues that natural gas drilling will save communities by giving farmers and landowners much-needed income. Damon's character and his co-worker, played by Frances McDormand, focus their sales pitches on the upside of natural gas production., Even before the drilling, the initial phase of development will boost your town's tax revenue, McDormand's character, Sue Thomason, argues. That means that money will be injected into your town immediately., What Would Fracking Do?, In the real world, there are significant environmental concerns surrounding gas drilling and fracking. In the movie, these criticisms emerge at a town hall meeting. A high school science teacher, played by Hal Holbrook, interrupts a local politician who's a less-than-honest cheerleader for the gas industry. The teacher encourages residents to Google the word fracking to research the process and its effects., Later, a man who bills himself as an environmentalist, played by John Krasinski, comes to town. He stokes the opposition and delivers a simplistic and misleading demonstration of fracking and drilling to a class of grade-school kids., To give the students a visual of what the drilling will do, the character Dustin Noble punches holes in a plastic bag filled with chemicals. The dirty liquid leaks out over a model farm, much to the students' disgust., A 'Work Of Fiction', The film remains in the realm of fiction as the town debates an upcoming vote on whether drilling and fracking should be allowed. In the real world, there's almost never a vote., In Pennsylvania, where this film was made, municipalities have very little authority over what happens, says Kate Sinding, senior attorney and deputy director of the Natural Resources Defense Council. They certainly don't get an up-and-down vote., Whether drilling happens depends more on state laws and regulations. Still, Sinding says this film is valuable because it outlines the conundrum that communities face when drillers come to town: There's the money, but there's also the environmental risks., The natural gas industry, on the other hand, sees little value in this film., It's a complete work of fiction, says Steve Forde, vice president of policy and communications for the Pittsburgh-based Marcellus Shale Coalition., The Industry's Response, He says the real truth will come as people watch what his industry does over the long term., This film may run in theaters for a several weeks maybe a couple of months, depending on its success at the box office, he says. But the work of our industry is going to continue for generations to come., Forde's group is appealing to moviegoers in its own way. The coalition is airing advertisements in Pennsylvania theaters asking people to visit an industry website, where natural gas drillers and their allies present their side of the story.
The alternative minimum tax created a useful fiction, as one analyst says, by appearing to shrink budget deficits., The alternative minimum tax created a useful fiction, as one analyst says, by appearing to shrink budget deficits., As Americans continue to sort out the contents of the fiscal cliff legislative package passed by Congress Tuesday, they are finding elements they like and some they hate., There's one exception. Everyone is glad Congress finally found a permanent fix for the alternative minimum tax., That one portion of the U.S. tax code always intended to affect only very wealthy people had turned itself into a dreaded stalker. The AMT became a constant threat to millions of middle-class taxpayers who never understood it and never knew when it might strike them., Each year, Congress would rush to the rescue to fix the AMT to keep it from walloping tens of millions of filers with hefty new taxes. But until this week, lawmakers would never approve a long-term solution. Why? Largely because having the AMT on the books helped future budget deficits look smaller by making it appear that new tax revenues soon would be rolling in., It was a useful fiction, but it was incredibly irresponsible, said Marc Goldwein, senior policy director for the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, a nonpartisan research group., Goldwein said that on paper, the AMT would generate tons of tax revenues in coming years, making the future deficits look less frightening. But no one on Capitol Hill ever believed those funds would actually show up because each year, lawmakers would apply a patch to keep the AMT from hauling in huge revenues., The Tax Policy Center, another research group, estimates that in 2022, the AMT with no patch would generate nearly $400 billion in revenues to fund government. But if Congress were to apply the typical patch as it always does, the AMT would bring in only about $90 billion in revenues in 2022., How did the situation get this weird? It's complicated. We'll explain:, Unfortunately, Congress failed to build in an inflation escalator. And over ensuing decades, it cut tax rates. The combined effect of higher inflation and lower rates undermined the intent of the AMT. Each year, it threatened to hit more and more middle-class families., The result was that a tax intended to affect only the richest Americans needed to get updated again and again so that it would hit only the wealthiest 4 million taxpayers. If Congress had not patched it on Tuesday, it would have applied to nearly half of the people with incomes of $75,000 to $100,000. That would have pulled in an estimated 27 million more tax filers, who would have found themselves paying an average of $3,700 more in taxes for 2012., The annual push to patch the AMT became chaotic because of congressional gridlock. The biggest and thorniest problem for the IRS and next year's filing season is the AMT patch, IRS Commissioner Doug Shulman said in a September speech to the American Bar Association., Finally, in the fiscal cliff deal, Congress agreed to permanently adjust AMT income exemption levels to inflation. It also gives lower-income families bigger tax breaks to make sure they don't face the threat of getting caught up in the AMT., Tax experts say the changes will pretty much ensure that people making less than six-figure salaries won't have to think about the AMT rates, which range from 26 percent for singles to 28 percent for married couples. The tax collected some $102 billion in 2010, the last tax year on record., Goldwein said the permanent fix will now provide a more realistic assessment of what revenues will be coming in the future. One nice thing about the fiscal cliff deal at least from a budget wonk perspective is that what is written into law is more closely aligned with what will actually happen in the future., And it will be better for taxpayers, who now will be able to plan better for what their taxes will be each year, according to Mark Vitner, senior economist for Wells Fargo Securities LLC., You shouldn't go through this patchwork year after year, Vitner said. It's always preferable to remove uncertainty.
A woman walks past a cabana complex pulled off its foundations by Superstorm Sandy in Sea Bright, N.J., in November., A woman walks past a cabana complex pulled off its foundations by Superstorm Sandy in Sea Bright, N.J., in November., Think about it and you'll start to realize how important the Jersey shore is to American culture. Sure there's the television show Jersey Shore, but there are more enduring signs. Consider the board game Monopoly; properties are named after Atlantic City locations. And during a television fundraiser for Superstorm Sandy victims in November, comedian Jimmy Fallon talked specifically about the Jersey Shore., As all you know, New Jersey was hit really hard. Some beaches were destroyed. Boardwalks were torn apart. But they will be rebuilt. It will come back, Fallon said as he and other musicians launched into the song Under the Boardwalk., The Jersey shore accounts for most of the estimated $39 billion tourists spent in the state in 2011. The shore is a part of the region's culture that inspires nostalgia. But there are questions about how to rebuild the places that are special to many and who should pay for it., For millions of people, the Jersey shore also is part of their personal story., My parents tell me that I was conceived at the shore in Lavallette, says Lisa Petrino, a nurse from Yardley, Pa. For a long time they called me 'Little Lava,' so I feel like it's in my blood., Petrino says the shore has been a place where families like hers that didn't have a lot of money could vacation. For most, the shore is not a high-brow getaway. We're talking hot dogs, fudge shops, carnivals and roller coasters not the kinds of things many people would fight to preserve, let alone rebuild. But Petrino hopes the shore she remembers will return., For so many people that roller coaster was a first date or a first holding hands or a first kiss. Could we get another roller coaster so that the future generations could still have that as a first experience? she says., As the Jersey shore rebuilds, it's becoming clear there are competing priorities that will have to be sorted out. In Long Branch, N.J., Maria Montanez has something else at the top of her priority list., I'm concerned about making sure you build smartly. Not so much rebuilding everything all over again, but rebuilding the area so, hopefully, it protects people for the future, Montanez says., In principle, many with fond memories of the Jersey shore will agree with that statement. But this will change what the shore looks like. A roller coaster that prompts fond memories may be built again but perhaps not on a pier out over the water., Never Again, In Sea Bright, N.J., dump trucks are still hauling away piles of what used to be homes and businesses. The cleanup here has a long way to go. Even the town hall was damaged, so for weeks after the storm, Mayor Dina Long says, various departments were housed together in a gymnasium., One hundred percent of the businesses were lost in Sea Bright during the storm. And 75 percent of our homes at this point are not habitable, including my own, she says., &ldquo; Is it going to look like what people remember from their childhoods? The answer is no, it's not. It's going to look different., - Sea Bright Mayor Dina Long, Long says the city recovery plan called Sea Bright 20/20 is based on the principle of never again, that the city will never be as vulnerable to a strong storm as it was before Sandy. That means a lot of changes., What I like to say is, we're putting Sea Bright up on high heels, Long says., Long says a key element is elevating homes so they're above flood levels., Is it going to look like what people remember from their childhoods? The answer is no, it's not. It's going to look different. It's going to look taller. But the idea is the next time a superstorm rolls through, we want to be able to pull down the hurricane shutters and wait for the power to come back on, Long says., That sounds simple, but dig a little deeper and you'll find there are some sticky issues that policymakers like Long will have to sort out. Here's just one: parking. As a tourist destination, the Jersey shore needs lots of parking spaces in the summer. But huge parking lots lead to runoff and water pollution., That is a concern for Cindy Zipf, executive director of Clean Ocean Action. As the shore is rebuilt, she hopes that improving water quality will be a priority., Do we really need to put in a parking lot that has hard blacktop that all the water runs off? Or can we put pervious surface areas and make parking lots not as big and put more green spaces in them? she says., Business owners like Ernie Giglio have a different vision when it comes to parking. Giglio, who co-owns a tackle shop, says he'd like to see more places for customers to park as long as they're going to redesign the area., Sea Bright's mayor says she thinks she can balance these competing priorities. But that's just one issue. There are also questions about how beaches should be engineered. It's clear that building up dunes can protect property, but that also blocks ocean views for expensive beachfront homes., A $2 Million Garbage Bill , Then there's the question of who will pay the billions of dollars it will cost to rebuild damaged communities. Mayor Long says her community of 1,500 people had about $400 million in damage., Our annual budget is $5 million. We have a $2 million garbage bill so far, she says. This is bigger than we can handle on our own., Some shore towns are debating whether to increase their beach access fees to raise more money for recovery but that won't be nearly enough. The federal government will have to help. Democratic Sen. Robert Menendez appealed to lawmakers for their support at a congressional hearing in late November., So I'm asking each of our colleagues in the Congress to stand with us and help New Jerseyans recover and rebuild in our time of need, just as I, personally, since I have been here, have stood with the people of the Gulf Coast after Hurricane Katrina or the people of Joplin, Mo., Menendez said., The Democratically controlled Senate already has passed a relief package worth more than $60 billion. Under pressure from fellow Republicans angry that a vote has not yet taken place Speaker John Boehner says the House will vote on part of the package Friday and the rest of it later this month.
The Transocean Discoverer Enterprise drill ship collects oil from the site of the Deepwater Horizon oil well as workers try to stem the flow of the spill in the Gulf of Mexico, June 12, 2010., The Transocean Discoverer Enterprise drill ship collects oil from the site of the Deepwater Horizon oil well as workers try to stem the flow of the spill in the Gulf of Mexico, June 12, 2010., Transocean, the owner of the Deepwater Horizon rig where 11 men died in April 2010, has agreed to pay $1.4 billion in criminal and civil penalties to resolve Justice Department allegations over its role in the Gulf of Mexico oil spill., A Transocean subsidiary also agreed to plead guilty to a single criminal misdemeanor charge for violating the Clean Water Act. Federal authorities blamed the company for acting negligently when the rig's crew proceeded with maneuvers to the deep-sea well in the face of clear danger signals that oil and natural gas were flowing. Transocean will operate under a form of corporate probation. A federal judge still needs to approve the plea agreement., Attorney General Eric Holder said the deal brings us one significant step closer to justice for the human, environmental and economic devastation wrought by the Deepwater Horizon disaster., Under the terms of the agreement, Transocean will pay $400 million in criminal penalties, most of which will be transferred to the National Academy of Sciences and the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation. The company also agreed to turn over $1 billion in civil penalties, 80 percent of which could go to fund projects in the Gulf states under legislation passed by Congress in 2012 called the RESTORE Act., In a written statement, Transocean said the deal is in the best interest of its shareholders and employees and will remove much of the uncertainty associated with the accident., This is a positive step forward, but it is also a time to reflect on the 11 men who lost their lives aboard the Deepwater Horizon, the company added. Their families continue to be in the thoughts and prayers of all of us at Transocean., The resolution means Transocean will no longer face a massive civil trial over the Gulf spill, set to begin in New Orleans late next month., The Justice Department should be commended for negotiating a $1 billion civil settlement with Transocean, which is a record amount and reflects the scope of the Gulf oil spill tragedy, said David Uhlmann, a former environmental crimes prosecutor who now teaches at the University of Michigan. But the criminal penalty also should have been at least $1 billion given Transocean's numerous failures to drill in a safe manner, which cost 11 workers their lives and billions of dollars in damages to communities along the Gulf. Transocean had disclosed in September that it was seeking a $1.5 billion settlement, so it is curious that the Justice Department has agreed to a settlement that is better than what Transocean was proposing and that does not appear to include Seaman's Manslaughter charges., The plea agreement with the rig owner comes weeks after oil giant BP agreed to pay $4.5 billion to resolve criminal and some civil Justice Department claims over the disaster. BP, federal and state officials continue to negotiate over the rest of those legal claims. Three former BP workers, including the top company men on the Macondo well, face individual criminal charges they are fighting in court.
Sliders. We're over them, the National Restaurant Association says., Sliders. We're over them, the National Restaurant Association says., Still ordering gazpacho and sliders at your favorite restaurant? Not pre-screening restaurant menus before you make a reservation? Well, hop in the DeLorean and set the chronometer to 2013: You're really behind the times., Technology is in and bacon-flavored chocolate is out, says a recent survey of 1,800 chefs across the nation., The survey, part of the National Restaurant Association's latest Restaurant Industry Forecast, categorized 198 menu items as hot trends, yesterday's news or perennial favorites. Meant to be an annual snapshot of the entire restaurant industry, the forecast also predicts trends in restaurant technologies and consumer attitudes in the coming year, says Hudson Riehle, senior vice president of Research at the NRA., Restaurant consumer expectations are high, even before they walk in the door. More than half of adult patrons will check out a restaurant's menu online before their visit, the report says., And about that menu? One of this year's hottest restaurant tech trends includes in-house iPad menus, which offer customers high-resolution photos and detailed descriptions of dishes., The survey also notes the growing popularity of take-out, delivery and food trucks, especially by younger patrons. Roughly 70 percent of restaurant industry traffic is now off-premises ... [and] 18- to 34-year-olds have a higher propensity to use off-premises meal solutions, Riehle says. As we've reported before, the millennial generation tends to make food decisions based on convenience., While convenience is key for younger customers, trends also suggest that sustainability and sourcing will be important values for consumers in 2013. The survey predicts that entree trends featuring locally sourced meats and sustainable seafood will become increasingly popular, though perennial comfort food like barbecue and macaroni and cheese are here to stay., Dietary and health concerns may also influence restaurant offerings nationwide, in smaller meal portions, vegetarian appetizers, whole-grain options for kids and wheat-free pastas for the gluten avoiders, the survey predicts. Of course, the government's new requirement to list calories on the menu may also have some influence here., Other hot trends include house-cured meats, artisanal cheeses and gourmet lemonade. And in addition to locally grown organic produce, hyperlocal items, such as vegetables raised in restaurant gardens, are also expected to ramp up in 2013., Among Americans now, there is a heightened level of interest in food overall, and that runs the spectrum from farm to fork, says Riehle. This interest could stem from the growing popularity of cooking shows and culinary school graduates, he says., Rising levels of food awareness could also explain the growing international trends on the menu. Peruvian food is expected to be the hottest fad in ethnic cuisine, while ethnic-inspired items, like chorizo scrambled eggs and coconut milk pancakes, are predicted to replace former breakfast favorite chicken and waffles., The typical American palate is now much more sophisticated than 10 to 20 years ago . ... [It is] more able to discern flavors, foods and spices. [Americans are] much more educated about the cuisines that restaurants have prepared, Riehle tells The Salt., But if you've got a restaurant, you need to focus. Instead of satisfying every hot trend in the forecast, Riehle says it's most important for to understand your customers and your location., Riehle says the key is, know your demographic.
The scene at a career fair in New York City last fall., The scene at a career fair in New York City last fall., Update at 8:40 a.m. ET. Jobless Claims Went Up; So Two Out Of Three Reports Were Positive:, There were 372,000 first-time claims for unemployment insurance last week, up by 10,000 from the week before, the Employment and Training Administration says. What's more, that previous week's total was revised up from the previous estimate of 350,000., The relatively negative news about jobless claims means that two out of this morning's three employment-related reporters were positive. As we reported earlier, the ADP National Employment Report showed a much larger than expected gain of 215,000 jobs in private sector payrolls last month. Also, the outplacement firm Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas reported that the number of layoffs announced in 2012 was the lowest for any year since 1997., Friday morning, the Bureau of Labor Statistics is due to release the week's big employment report. It will tell us what the unemployment rate was in December and how many jobs were added to payrolls last month., According to Bloomberg News, economists expect to hear that there were 150,000 jobs added to public and private payrolls in December about the same as the 146,000 added in November. They also expect to hear that the nation's unemployment rate stated at 7.7 percent., Update at 8:20 a.m. ET. Hiring Picked Up In December:, The morning's second employment-related report also brings at least modestly good news., Private sector employment increased by 215,000 jobs from November to December, according to the latest ADP National Employment Report. That's well above what economists expected to hear: a gain of about 130,000., And ADP revised up its figure on growth in November, to a gain of 148,000 jobs vs. its original estimate of 118,000., The ADP report, a private survey done by that company and Moody's Analytics, is sometimes a sign of what the Bureau of Labor Statistics will say when it releases its figures on monthly job growth. As we said earlier, BLS is due to release its December data on Friday at 8:30 a.m. ET., We'll update this post again when we see the figures on last week's claims for unemployment benefits. They're due at 8:30 a.m. ET., Our original post:, There's some good news this morning about the labor market., The number of layoffs announced by U.S. companies plunged in December, a new report signals. Also, the number of layoffs announced in 2012 was the lowest for any year since 1997., That news from the outplacement firm Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas is the first of three jobs-related reports due this morning. In the next hour, we're due to get the ADP National Employment Report about hiring at private companies last month and the Employment and Training Administration's latest figures on first-time claims for unemployment benefits. We'll update with highlights from those reports., According to Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas:, &mdash; After three consecutive months of increased layoff activity, the number of planned job cuts announced in December plunged to 32,556, the second lowest monthly total of 2012 and down from 57,081 in November., &mdash; Due in large part to the slow pace of downsizing in the third quarter, annual job cuts totaled 523,362, which is the lowest year-end total since 1997, when employers announced 434,350 job cuts during the year. The 2012 total was 14 percent lower than the 606,082 job cuts announced in 2011., &mdash; 'We have not seen this [lower] level of job cutting since before the dot.com collapse and subsequent 2001 recession,' said John A. Challenger, chief executive officer of Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas., Friday at 8:30 a.m. ET, the Bureau of Labor Statistics is due to report on the December unemployment rate and job growth that month.
House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio (right), and Majority Leader Eric Cantor, R-Va., enter a Republican caucus meeting at the U.S. Capitol on Tuesday., House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio (right), and Majority Leader Eric Cantor, R-Va., enter a Republican caucus meeting at the U.S. Capitol on Tuesday., By letting the House take up the Senate's fiscal cliff-dodging legislation that raises income tax rates on the wealthiest earners, Speaker John Boehner answered affirmatively a question that had been on many minds: Would he allow an up-or-down floor vote on a bill opposed by most fellow House Republicans?, Until the New Year's Day vote, Boehner had generally operated the House under what was known as the Hastert Rule. Named for former Speaker Dennis Hastert, it required a majority of the majority to support legislation before the speaker approved a floor vote., But in the case of the fiscal cliff legislation passed by the House in a 257-167 vote, the majority of the majority opposed the bill, in large part because it lacked the significant spending cuts they desired., Its 151 House GOP opponents even included members of Boehner's leadership team Majority Leader Eric Cantor of Virginia and Majority Whip Kevin McCarthy of California., That Boehner, from Ohio, allowed the House to vote on the Senate bill arguably sets a precedent for his speakership, and perhaps gives a preview of what could be the shape of things to come. Or maybe it just sets a precedent for the most contentious legislation, whose passage is deemed crucial to keep the economic recovery alive and otherwise keep at bay a parade of horribles., Sarah Binder, a George Washington University political scientist, wrote on The Monkey Cage blog that there appears to be a new House rule book., On one of the most important House votes of the year, the minority ruled. The Hastert Rule (go forward only with the support of a majority of the majority party) has been displaced (at least for now) by the Boehner Rule (sometimes a majority of the majority has to be rolled for the sake of the party's reputation)., Of course, this assumes that Boehner gets to retain his speakership in the new 113th Congress, which is sworn in Thursday., There is plenty of conservative outrage including accusations that Boehner doesn't represent them and renewed calls for his ouster as speaker., But you can find plenty of people, including Republican House members, who think Boehner will keep the speaker's gavel in the new Congress., Speaking on C-SPAN Wednesday morning, Rep. Mick Mulvaney, a conservative Republican from South Carolina, said:, I don't think you'll see a change in the speakership. The real question is: Are the next two years under the Boehner speakership ... will the next two years of leadership be like the previous two years of leadership? The conservatives in the party really feel like we're losing the spending battle., We have not cut spending. In fact, the one place we were supposed to cut spending was on the sequester [or spending cuts that were supposed to start with the new year's arrival]. But that got delayed [because of the deal]. So our question as conservatives is, when are we going to start this battle over spending? We've waited two years now. We're not going to wait much longer., While conservatives like Mulvaney are clearly restive, it appears there isn't a large-scale mutiny brewing within the House Republican conference to oust Boehner in the way Newt Gingrich was forced out in January 1999., But Boehner's power could be tested soon if he needs to again rely on House Democrats to deliver votes needed to pass other controversial legislation in coming weeks like the postponed spending cuts of the fiscal cliff sequester, or raising the nation's debt ceiling., It's not universally accepted that the divisions within the House Republican conference will again require Boehner to get Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi's help in getting crucial fiscal legislation across the finish line., Speaking Wednesday with All Things Considered co-host Robert Siegel, Rep. Tom Cole, R-Okla., said he didn't see what happened with the New Year's Day vote as foreshadowing what's likely to happen in coming weeks and months., I would expect the deals going forward to be majority Republican and minority Democrat as opposed to the other way around, Cole said. The lawmaker explained that legislation with tax hikes for the rich and a lack of spending cuts was terrain favoring Democrats, as he saw it. By contrast, bills that push spending cuts and entitlement reforms will be more Republican-friendly battleground, Cole said., Cole said he expects Boehner will be re-elected speaker, in part because of the lack of a plausible alternative., It's worth noting that Boehner never vowed that he would only bring legislation to a floor vote if he had a majority of a majority., Weeks before he assumed the speakership in 2011, a reporter asked him at a news conference if he would abide by the Hastert Rule. Boehner said:, I'm I'm going to run the House my way, work with members on both sides of the aisle to decide what should come to the floor and what shouldn't come to the floor. I don't think we need to just set up hard rules and hard walls that just get in the way of doing the will of the American people. If we're open with to each other and we're willing to listen to the American people, we'll have we'll have good debate every day, and we'll have a healthy outcome., And even Hastert or his successor, Pelosi, diverged from that rule at times. As the Associated Press' Charles Babington wrote:, Pelosi, as House speaker in 2006, violated the 'majority of the majority' rule by letting Republicans provide most of the votes for an Iraq war funding measure she disliked., Hastert, the Republican speaker from 1999 to 2007, overrode the rule at least twice. In one case, he let Democratic votes carry the load on a stem cell research bill everyone knew President George W. Bush would veto. Hastert also yielded to pressure to let the McCain-Feingold campaign finance bill pass even though most House Republicans opposed it.
Al-Jazeera announced Wednesday that it was acquiring Current TV, the network launched by former Vice President Al Gore., By acquiring Current TV, Al Jazeera will significantly expand our existing distribution footprint in the U.S., as well as increase our newsgathering and reporting efforts in America, Al-Jazeera Director General Ahmed bin Jassim Al Thani said in a statement., The new channel, Al-Jazeera America, will be based in New York. The Qatar-based Arabic-language network already operates an English-language arm, Al-Jazeera English. The New York Times reported that roughly 60 percent of the new network's programming will be produced in the U.S.; the rest will come from Al-Jazeera English., The acquisition gives Al-Jazeera, which is financed by the Qatari government, access to an American TV audience. According to The Times, Current is available in about 60 million of the 100 million homes with cable or satellite service., Here's The Times' Media Decoder blog's take on the acquisition:, To date, the country's cable and satellite distributors have been reluctant to carry Al Jazeera English. It is available in just a handful of cities, including New York and Washington. To change that, Al Jazeera has lobbied distributors, called for a letter-writing campaign by supporters and promoted its widely praised coverage of the Arab Spring., Acquiring Current TV, and thus its distribution deals across the country, solves this dilemma for Al Jazeera, at least partially., In its statement, Al-Jazeera said that it will open new bureaus across the U.S. It already operates bureaus in New York, Washington, D.C., Los Angeles, Miami and Chicago. The expansion, the network said, will double Al-Jazeera's U.S.-based staff to more than 300 employees.
The 'rum tax' is extended., The 'rum tax' is extended., You might have thought the intense partisan negotiations over the so-called fiscal cliff were all about who wins and who loses when it comes to taxes and government programs., And that assessment would be essentially correct but some of the winners might strike you as a bit odd., Tucked away in the bill's obscure cul-de-sacs are a bevy of obscure tax and spending provisions. We picked five for your perusal. Here goes:, &mdash; NASCAR: Section 312 of the bill extends a provision that places National Association of Stock Car Auto Racing tracks in the same category as amusement parks for tax purposes. That allows owners to depreciate the cost of a new track in just seven years instead of the more common 15- to 39-year time frame. To qualify, a track must be a permanent facility and host an inaugural race within three years of completion. Estimates are that the tax break is worth $70 million to Daytona Beach, Fla.-based NASCAR. , &mdash; Asparagus growers: The measure includes a provision that extends market loss assistance for asparagus producers who are being hurt by low-cost asparagus coming in from South America. The subsidy amounts to $15 million a year half going to fresh-market asparagus production and the other half to processed or frozen production., &mdash; Hollywood: Section 317 of the bill retroactively extends (for a total of two years) special expensing rules to certain film and television producers. The cost of the production can't exceed $15 million (or $20 million if the production is in a designated low-income area) as long as three-quarters of the production is done inside the United States. The rule allows production expenses to be deducted in the year they occur instead of depreciated over a period of years. The break is meant to encourage U.S.-based productions. It's expected to cost the government $266 million this year., &mdash; Rum tax: The bill extends by two years a $13.50 per proof-gallon tax on rum. The revenue from the tax goes into the coffers of the treasuries of the territories of Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands. According to a 2010 report by the Congressional Research Service, Puerto Rico raked in $371 million from the tax in 2008, while the U.S. Virgin Islands received almost $100 million. The New York Times reported in 2010 that the origin of the tax dates back nearly a century:, Because rum producers in the islands are exempt from federal excise taxes, the government imposed an equalization tax on Puerto Rican rum producers in 1917 and gave the money to the commonwealth. In 1954, the United States extended the arrangement to the Virgin Islands., For half a century, the program allowed the islands to replenish their depleted treasuries and pay for infrastructure, schools and social services. Puerto Rico used less than 10 percent of the $450 million it received last year to provide marketing support and production subsidies to rum companies, according to government officials, leaving the rest for the island., &mdash; Electric scooters: The bill extends a tax credit for qualified two- or three-wheeled plug-in electric vehicles, amounting to 10 percent of the cost of the vehicle up to $2,500. The vehicle must be manufactured primarily for use on public streets, roads, and highways, be capable of reaching 45 mph and be powered by a minimum 4 kilowatt-hour battery (up from 2.5 kilowatt-hours previously). The retroactive extension is good until Jan. 1, 2014.
Farmer Randy Dreher unloads corn from his combine during harvest north of Audubon, Iowa. Farm exports are booming and high global prices are helping growers despite the U.S. drought., Farmer Randy Dreher unloads corn from his combine during harvest north of Audubon, Iowa. Farm exports are booming and high global prices are helping growers despite the U.S. drought., Suddenly, the new year is looking a bit brighter at least in the eyes of most economists and investors., On Day 1 of 2013, Congress voted to veer away from the fiscal cliff by passing a package of provisions that avoided broad tax hikes and big spending cuts. And on Day 2, stock prices shot up., There's a lot of relief, said Mark Hopkins, senior economist with Moody's Analytics. The worst-case scenario has been averted., Yes, there will be new budget battles in February, after President Obama has had his second inauguration and the 113th Congress has gotten itself organized., But for now at least, Americans can take some comfort in having more policy certainty about taxes. And that helps businesses with their planning for the new year, according to John Canally, an economist for LPL Financial, an investment-adviser consulting firm., People now know for certain what their tax rates will be, Canally said. Financial markets don't like uncertainty. So today's rally is about people thinking: 'OK, now I know the landscape.' , Like most other economists, both Hopkins and Canally say growth will continue in 2013, but not by a robust pace. That's because part of the legislation passed Tuesday by Congress will end the payroll tax holiday, which had been in place for two years. That will reduce take-home pay for all workers., The payroll tax comes back now and that will affect everyone right away, Canally said. It will be a drag on the economy because the typical household will have roughly $1,000 less to spend this year, compared with 2011 and 2012., On the other hand, the rebuilding efforts in parts of the country hit by Hurricane Sandy this past autumn will generate jobs and spending, he noted. On balance, the economy should grow at about 2 percent in 2013, which would be roughly the same pace as 2012, he said., That forecast is in line with other mainstream economists. The consensus is that growth will be well below the 3 to 4 percent expansion rate that would generate strong job growth and better incomes. But it should be enough to continue to whittle down the 7.7 percent jobless rate and keep the recovery growing into its fourth year., Tom Porcelli, chief U.S. economist for RBC Capital Markets, predicts the housing market will continue its slow recovery in 2013. After a brutal slide since 2006, housing has bottomed, he said. At this point, its turnaround is well embedded and unlikely to falter, he said., We do expect housing to continue to improve, albeit glacially, he said., Industrial production will expand too, but at a rather disappointing rate of 2 percent, according to the Manufacturers Alliance for Productivity and Innovation, a trade group. It will not be until the second half of 2014 that the economy will grow at what could be called a moderate pace, the group's chief economist, Daniel Meckstroth, said in his forecast., But there are some brighter spots within manufacturing. Auto production, for example, should remain fairly healthy because Americans are buying more cars than they have in four years. Edmunds.com, which closely follows the auto industry, forecasts light vehicle sales will rise 4 percent over the pace set in 2012., And aircraft makers are somewhat upbeat, mostly because of growth in overseas markets. Marion Blakey, head of the Aerospace Industries Association, said her trade group's number crunchers are predicting $6 billion in additional sales in the coming year., There's good news for 2013 yes, that may surprise you, Blakey said at the AIA's annual forecasting luncheon in December. AIA says customers all over the world are upgrading fleets with more fuel-efficient aircraft, giving a boost to U.S. manufacturers., Exports are the key to expansion in the agriculture sector too. The U.S. Department of Agriculture says that over the period from 2009 to 2012, farmers had the best four years ever for exports, which shot up more than 50 percent., Brandon Kliethermes, the agriculture economist for IHS Global Insight, said most U.S. farmers and ranchers had a tough year because of drought. Still, with the help of federal insurance and high global prices, many were able to profit in 2012., They had a terrible production year, but from a financial standpoint, they came out fine, he said. That means they now have money to spend on preparing for spring. They are upgrading equipment, buying new tractors and trucks, he said. We keep having these droughts, but at some point, we'll have average weather., If 2013 turns out to be that normal weather year and exports continue to be strong, the potential for locking in profits is there, Kliethermes said.
Looking up: Traders on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange earlier today., Looking up: Traders on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange earlier today., Though more big battles lie ahead in Washington, Wall Street is following the lead of financial markets around the world in giving a thumbs-up to the deal that kept the federal government from going completely over the so-called fiscal cliff., As The Wall Street Journal says, U.S. stocks vaulted higher on the first day of the new year, joining a global equity rally after Congress' last-minute agreement on the deficit. Among the reasons for relief: The deal means income taxes won't be going up for about 99 percent of Americans. If they had risen as scheduled, some economists say, the still-recovering economy might have been pushed back into recession by a drop in consumer spending., Lawmakers also at least postponed automatic cuts in federal spending., After about 90 minutes of trading, the Dow Jones industrial average was up more than 230 points (1.77 percent)., Update at 5:08 p.m. ET, with closing prices:, The Dow Jones industrial average finished the day at 13,412.55 up 308.41 points, or 2.35 percent. A broader measure, the S&P; 500 stock index, closed up 36.23 points (up 2.54 percent) at 1,462.42. The tech-heavy Nasdaq gained 92.75 points, or 3.07 percent.
The budget compromise bill that is meant to allow the U.S. government to avoid higher tax rates and austere budget cuts has tax rates as its central issue, with discussions about more spending cuts, and the federal debt limit, put off until the coming weeks., Now that NPR and other organizations have had some time to look at the compromise, we can list some of the proposed effects contained in the Senate bill that the House began considering Tuesday. This list isn't exhaustive we're including links to other analysis below. But here's some of what the proposed deal would do:, You can review the nonpartisan Joint Committee On Taxation report of the Senate bill online, in PDF form. For more of a boiled-down look at the costs and savings and, we warn you, all comparisons depend upon which set of projections you use for a base level the bipartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget has a handy chart.
President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden make a statement regarding the passage of the fiscal cliff bill in the Brady Press Briefing Room at the White House late Tuesday evening., President Barack Obama and Vice President Joe Biden make a statement regarding the passage of the fiscal cliff bill in the Brady Press Briefing Room at the White House late Tuesday evening., The House of Representatives voted 257-167 late Tuesday to pass a Senate-approved compromise deal that stops large tax increases for 99 percent of Americans, and delays massive spending cuts for two months., The bill now goes to President Obama, who is expected to sign it into law., NPR's S.V. Date is reporting on the deal for our Newscast unit. Here's what he says:, The eventual deal was hammered out by Senate Republican Leader Mitch McConnell and Vice President Joe Biden. It passed the Senate with overwhelming, bipartisan support., But passage in the House came only after Speaker John Boehner abandoned a longstanding Republican requirement that a bill could only come to the floor if a majority of Republicans supported it., Update at 11:40 p.m. ET Obama Welcomes Deal, President Obama thanked lawmakers from both parties for their votes, saying it allows him to sign a law that raises taxes on the wealthiest 2 percent of Americans while preventing tax hikes that could have sent the economy back into recession., Speaking at the White House, he also urged lawmakers to not wait until the last minute on the other looming budget deadlines., The one thing that, I think, hopefully in the new year we'll focus on is seeing if we can put a package like this together with a little bit less drama, a little less brinkmanship, not scare the heck out of folks quite as much, he said., Our original post:, House Speaker John Boehner of Ohio arrives on Capitol Hill on Tuesday as legislation to negate a fiscal cliff of across-the-board tax increases and sweeping spending cuts moves to the GOP-dominated House., House Speaker John Boehner of Ohio arrives on Capitol Hill on Tuesday as legislation to negate a fiscal cliff of across-the-board tax increases and sweeping spending cuts moves to the GOP-dominated House., The House of Representatives is in a rare New Year's Day session, as its members consider a budget compromise the Senate approved in the early-morning hours of 2013. Many House Republicans are unhappy with the deal including Rep. Eric Cantor, the chamber's Republican leader., Update at 8:50 p.m. ET: House Moves To Put Senate Bill To A Vote, Facing the prospect of being seen as the chief obstacle in blocking legislation to avoid the fiscal cliff, House Republicans moved to bring the measure to the House floor for a vote., The bill was approved by the Senate in the early hours of Tuesday and sent to the House., The decision came after a long day of closed-door meetings in which House Republican leaders explored the possibility of amending the bill and sending it back to the Senate with changes regarding spending cuts., But the Senate adjourned for the day, and the bill might have gone unanswered until Wednesday, and have had an adverse effect on financial markets., In addition, a Senate Democratic leadership aide said Majority Leader Harry Reid would not take up the bill if the House changed it and returned it to the Senate, reports The Associated Press., It is unclear if the expected up-or-down House vote would pass., Update at 6:09 p.m. ET: The Senate Has Adjourned Until Noon ET, Wednesday., Update at 3:54 p.m. ET: House Vote Is Still Possible Tuesday., Reporters from CNN and Reuters quote Cantor as saying I do not support the bill, as he passed journalists gathered near a GOP meeting Tuesday afternoon but he added that no final decisions have been made on the best way to handle the bill., Moments later, Rep. Steve LaTourette, R-Ohio, told CNN's Dana Bash that he and his colleagues won't be hemmed in by the votes of sleep-deprived octogenarians in the Senate. He added that the House might hold a vote on the compromise bill after a meeting at 5 p.m. ET fueling ideas that the House leadership might hold a vote on an amended version of the bill., Those developments closely followed an impromptu news conference held by House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, who called for action on the bill., It shouldn't even be a question, Pelosi said, noting that the House has been waiting for the Senate to send it a bill. She said that she is now looking for a straight up-or-down vote on the compromise., The Senate vote was 89-8 in favor of the deal, which would delay by two months across-the-board cuts totaling $24 billion that are scheduled to kick in under the fiscal cliff collection of budget cuts and tax hikes., As NPR's David Welna reports from Capitol Hill, Republican Mo Brooks of Alabama complains that the compromise bill is being rushed through the House., Mr. Speaker, if we vote on the Senate fiscal cliff bill today, I will vote against it because this is not the way to do the peoples' business., The compromise deal's focus on taxes, and postponement of spending cut decisions seems to be the main sticking point for House Republicans. Moments ago, the offices of Cantor and House Speaker John Boehner released seemingly identical statements noting that The lack of spending cuts in the Senate bill was a universal concern amongst members in today's meeting., The revenue gap created by the postponed mandatory cuts would be filled temporarily by tax increases and cuts in other programs. The stop-gap is meant to give Congress and the president more time to work out a broader deal., The Senate spent the first few hours of the New Year ironing out the final details of a plan to roll back a package of automatic spending cuts and tax increases that technically went into effect at midnight., President Obama, speaking shortly after the Senate vote, said that while neither Democrats nor Republicans got everything they wanted, this agreement is the right thing to do for our country. He urged the House, which is set to meet at noon, to pass it without delay., The Senate vote took place after midnight, meaning that the U.S. technically went over the much-dreaded fiscal cliff. But the impact is expected to be minimal assuming the House votes to pass the bill in the next few days., The House must act before midnight Thursday, when it hands off the baton to the incoming 113th Congress. If it cannot act before then, the fiscal crisis would be handed to the new Congress to consider., The deal would leave both sides with less than they want: Republicans wanted taxes to remain steady for all Americans, Democrats wanted Bush-era tax cuts to expire for those making more than $250,000 a year. The two sides compromised at raising rates on taxpayers earning in excess of $400,000 (or $450,000 for couples)., One of the most vocal opponents in the Senate was Iowa Democrat Tom Harkin, who said the compromise was a boon to the wealthiest Americans at the expense of those with lower incomes., Maybe now we are all believers of trickle-down economics. Not I, Harkin said on the floor., As NPR's John Ydstie reports, Ninety-nine percent of Americans will see little or no change in income tax rates because of this deal. But the top 1 percent will see an increase of almost 5 percentage points on incomes above $400,000 for individuals and $450,000 for couples., It would be the first major tax increase in two decades., Ydstie says the agreement extends unemployment benefits for two million Americans but it doesn't extend the payroll tax holiday., That means virtually all U.S. workers will see their Social Security payroll tax rise 2 percentage points, back to the normal 6.2 percent on income up to $113,000, he says., For the typical household with $50,000 in earnings, that amounts to about $20 per week. It could cost high-income households as much as $85 a week., It's now the House's turn to seal the deal. The Senate overwhelmingly supported the compromise, and House Speaker John Boehner of Ohio and the chamber's Republican lawmakers are under enormous pressure to follow suit., As The Associated Press points out:, House Speaker John Boehner pointedly refrained from endorsing the agreement, though he's promised a vote on it or a GOP alternative right away. But he was expected to encounter opposition from House conservatives., It's three strikes in my book and I'll be voting no on this bill, Rep. Tim Huelskamp told CNN Tuesday morning. Huelskamp says the legislation would impose a hardship on small businesses around the country and falls short of addressing the need for cuts in spending., Speaking before the Senate's vote in the small hours of Jan. 1, Vice President Joe Biden who worked with Senate GOP Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky to hammer out the measure said his long experience on the Hill had taught him not to try to predict an outcome from either chamber., You shouldn't predict how the House is going to vote. But I feel very, very good, Biden told reporters.
Assistant U.S. Attorney General Lanny Breuer announces a nearly $2 billion money laundering settlement with British bank HSBC on Dec. 11 in New York City., Assistant U.S. Attorney General Lanny Breuer announces a nearly $2 billion money laundering settlement with British bank HSBC on Dec. 11 in New York City., Every year, banks handle tens of millions of transactions. Some of them involve drug money, or deals with companies doing secret business with countries like Iran and Syria, in defiance of trade sanctions., But if the Justice Department has its way, banks will be forced to change to spot illegal transactions and blow the whistle before any money changes hands., Federal prosecutors have already collected more than $4.5 billion from some of the world's biggest financial institutions banks charged with looking the other way when dirty money passed through their accounts., Sen. Carl Levin, D-Mich., spent two years investigating many of those shady deals., Wrongdoers can use U.S. dollars and U.S. wire transfers to commit crimes, arm terror groups, produce and transport illegal drugs, loot government coffers and even pursue weapons of mass destruction, Levin said at a congressional hearing last year., Assistant Attorney General Lanny Breuer says stopping these kinds of crimes is the goal of the Justice Department's new push against money laundering., Certainly one of the things we want to do is not just put criminals in jail, but we want to take away their ill-gotten gains, and we don't want to permit them to use our financial institutions to hide the money that they have stolen, Breuer says., The Justice Department is relying on a law called the Bank Secrecy Act. It requires financial institutions to be on the lookout for sketchy transactions. That law is 40 years old, but prosecutors just recently put more energy into enforcing it., Willie Sutton, the bank robber ... they asked him why does he rob banks, and he said, 'Because that's where the money is,' says Eugene Ludwig, who led the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency in the Clinton years. And so, why does the banking industry get involved in this? And it's because money flows go through banks., Banks like HSBC, a British bank that agreed a few weeks ago to pay nearly $2 billion to settle money laundering allegations. Another British bank, Standard Chartered, was accused of handling money for companies tied to regimes in Iran, Sudan and Libya. Standard Chartered coughed up more than $200 million to settle those charges last month., Then, there's the financial service known as MoneyGram, which recently forfeited $100 million for overlooking widespread marketing scams by its agents. Prosecutors said the scam artists preyed on senior citizens and other vulnerable people; 25 agents have been charged with crimes in that case., But Ludwig, who now consults for banks at the Promontory Financial Group, says prosecutors and bank regulators can't catch all the fraud, so they're depending on the banks themselves to do a better job., Banks are not set up historically really to be kind of quasi law enforcement enterprises, which is really what the U.S. government's asking of them, he says., Every time a financial institution makes a fix, criminals try to work around it. Ludwig calls it a cat-and-mouse game. Fair or not, it's what the government is demanding of our enterprises, and everybody has to face up to that reality, I think, he says., There's another important reality, says Tom Perrelli, a former Justice Department official, who recently went back into private law practice at the firm Jenner &amp; Block., This area is similar to the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act, which has been an area of focus for the Justice Department for some time, Perrelli says., Like the FCPA, which spawned a cottage industry for law firms, the Bank Secrecy Act and other money laundering laws are areas where companies can unquestionably comply with the law, but it requires training and some constant supervision over personnel all across the world, Perrelli says., If banks are going to comply, Perrelli says bankers and their lawyers are going to have to do a lot more work this year.
Rhode Island's minimum wage will increase from $7.40 to $7.75., Rhode Island's minimum wage will increase from $7.40 to $7.75., On Tuesday, the minimum wage in 10 states will increase by anywhere from a dime to 35 cents., For all of the states but one, the pay hikes are part of automatic adjustments designed to keep up with the cost of living., In Rhode Island, it took a state law to raise the minimum wage for the first time in five years., Rising Wages Vs. Rising Prices, Cafe Zog in Providence is a cozy, quirky place where you can grab a coffee and bagel to go, or nab a booth then head to the counter to order a hot breakfast., There are two colleges nearby, so cafe owner Julio Fonseca tends to hire students or recent grads., They start at a minimum wage, he says. After a few months, if they stay, we usually reward them according to their work ethics., Sydonia Lary has worked at the cafe long enough to get a bump in pay. As an artist working two hourly wage jobs, she says, it's difficult to make ends meet., I mean, this economy, everything is so expensive nowadays, and trying to pay rent and get groceries and whatever your mode of transportation may be, only making $7.40 an hour, it just doesn't really cut it, she says., Rhode Island is hiking its minimum wage from that $7.40 to $7.75. For workers like Lary, this is good news. Not so much for her boss. Fonseca says it will be more expensive for him to reward his hard-working employees. He has spent the past year watching food prices climb, and now that wages are rising, he's worried., Every time something goes up, we can't raise the prices, otherwise we're going to price ourselves out of the market, he says. So, it's very tough., Losing The Low Rung On The Totem Pole, Bill Vernon works with the National Federation of Independent Business, a group that tends to fight against wage hikes. He says higher wages will force businesses to refrain from hiring, and that will harm young workers looking for that entry-level job., An increase in the minimum wage eliminates that low rung on the ladder that people can step on to get ahead, he says., States can set their own minimum wage. There are some exceptions, but for the most part, the federal wage is the least someone can make. In the 10 states raising theirs on Jan. 1, nearly a million workers will benefit. Washington state has bumped its wage up to $9.19 an hour. That's almost $2 more than in neighboring Idaho., T. William Lester, a regional economist at the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, works with a research team that looked at minimum wages along state lines., It's not like all the businesses that used to be in Washington state found it now way more worthwhile to relocate to Idaho and take advantage of the lower minimum wage, he says., In fact, the research team looked at every county that borders a state line and found that a rising minimum wage had no impact on employment. It actually cut costs by reducing turnover., And when you raise the minimum wage, you kind of are raising the bar, Lester says., NFIB's Bill Vernon says legislatures in some 40 states will look at raising their minimum wage this year. And lawmakers on Capitol Hill are kicking around the idea of bumping up the $7.25 federal minimum wage by about $2., Vernon says he could see Congress agreeing to a $1 raise, but that would take compromise, something that hasn't been around much in Washington these days.
Solar panels come off the line at SunPower's solar manufacturing plant near San Jose, Calif., Solar panels come off the line at SunPower's solar manufacturing plant near San Jose, Calif., It's been a banner year for solar energy. The United States is on track to install a record number of solar power systems thanks in large part to low-cost solar panels from China. That's been challenging for American manufacturers, and federal officials have put trade tariffs on Chinese panels., Things look busy at the SunPower solar manufacturing plant in Silicon Valley. Workers are screwing frames onto shiny, 6-foot solar panels as they come off the line., This plant has a long list of notable visitors governors, lawmakers, federal officials. It's because SunPower is a top supplier and because there aren't many solar plants left to visit. It's going to require being lonely to be one of the winners, but it's unfortunate that there aren't many American solar companies, says Tom Werner, the company's chief executive officer., He says the growing market for solar has attracted competition. Chinese manufacturers scaled up quickly and in just four years, solar panel prices fell 75 percent. The economics have gotten way, way more challenging, Werner says. Difficult for some companies to make it., SunPower is just hoping to break even this year. Several American manufacturers filed a trade complaint against China, saying companies there are getting illegal subsidies. In November, the U.S. International Trade Commission agreed and locked in trade tariffs of up to 36 percent., Werner says while SunPower didn't directly join the complaint, it does stand to gain. Let's just say it won't hurt our pricing, but I don't know if it will be a big advantage, he says., Solar After Solyndra, The solar industry doesn't need more bad news, says Werner especially after the political scandal of one particular bankrupt solar company. It's amazing how many people know the name of that company, he says., Solyndra is the company-that shall-not-be-named, kind of like Lord Voldemort in Harry Potter., Well see, if I name the company then I'm just propagating the whole deal, Werner says., It's an entirely different story for solar installers. At Sungevity's Oakland headquarters, company President Danny Kennedy introduces me to the sales team., Sungevity is one part power company, one part Internet startup. The team here designs rooftop solar systems virtually, by using satellite photos of each house., We grew gangbusters in 2010. Doubled again in '11. Have continued to grow this year, Kennedy says., Jobs At Risk, Sungevity gets its solar panels from the U.S., South Korea and China. Even with the trade tariffs, prices haven't gone up much because Chinese solar companies have found a loophole: There's no tariff if the individual silicon solar cells are made outside China but then assembled into panels in Chinese factories. Kennedy says focusing on manufacturing jobs is a mistake., He says there are more jobs in the sales, finance, installation and maintenance end of the value chain than there [are] in the factory. It's probably a ratio of about 3 to 1., Kennedy says a trade war with China puts those jobs at risk., We're growing faster than any industry over $100 billion in value in the global economy, he says. And yet, there is this nabobs of negativity around us that are causing concerns in the investment community. It's crazy talk., Dan Kammen, an energy professor at the University of California, Berkeley, says the solar industry is totally a teenager in a lot of ways., The industry is growing dramatically, he says. There's also incredible turmoil. And there are some of these teenagers who are clearly going to be young prodigies and others who are going to need to go into rehab., Kammen says when companies fight over market share and race to the lowest price, startups with cutting-edge technology just can't compete. Losing that innovation, he says, could be the real cost of a solar trade war.
The White House released this statement from President Obama at 2:30 a.m. on Tuesday:, Leaders from both parties in the Senate came together to reach an agreement that passed with overwhelming bipartisan support today that protects 98 percent of Americans and 97 percent of small business owners from a middle class tax hike. While neither Democrats nor Republicans got everything they wanted, this agreement is the right thing to do for our country and the House should pass it without delay., This agreement will also grow the economy and shrink our deficits in a balanced way by investing in our middle class, and by asking the wealthy to pay a little more., What's more, today's agreement builds on previous efforts to reduce our deficits. Last year, I worked with Democrats and Republicans to cut spending by more than $1 trillion. Tonight's agreement does even more by asking millionaires and billionaires to begin to pay their fair share for the first time in twenty years. As promised, that increase will be immediate, and it will be permanent., There's more work to do to reduce our deficits, and I'm willing to do it. But tonight's agreement ensures that, going forward, we will continue to reduce the deficit through a combination of new spending cuts and new revenues from the wealthiest Americans. And as we address our ongoing fiscal challenges, I will continue to fight every day on behalf of the middle class and all those fighting to get into the middle class to forge an economy that grows from the middle out, not from the top down.
Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-KY, leaves the Senate chamber to caucus in the Capitol on Sunday., Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-KY, leaves the Senate chamber to caucus in the Capitol on Sunday., It is almost unimaginable that both the House and Senate would be in session on a Sunday evening on the penultimate day of the year. And yet, they both were, with lawmakers hoping it was not merely a big waste of time and effort., A bipartisan push by Senate leaders over the weekend has so far failed to forge a deal to spare American wage earners from tax hikes and shield government programs from drastic cutbacks., Congress is meeting again Monday in hopes of a breakthrough or in an effort to not appear to be asleep at the wheel., 'Significant Distance' Between Parties, Majority Leader Harry Reid took to the Senate floor Sunday night saying the Senate would reconvene Monday at 11 a.m. ET, and that by then he hoped to have further announcements to make about skirting the fiscal cliff:, There's still significant distance between the two sides, but negotiations continue, he said. There is still time left to reach an agreement, and we intend to continue negotiations., Reid had acknowledged earlier that he and his fellow Democrats failed to deliver the counteroffer he'd promised in response to an offer GOP Senate leader Mitch McConnell made Saturday evening., A frustrated McConnell announced he was reaching out to Vice President Joe Biden in hopes of rebooting the stalled talks., There is no single issue that remains an impossible sticking point. The sticking point appears to be a willingness, an interest, or frankly the courage to close the deal, he said. I want everyone to know I'm willing to get this done, but I need a dance partner., Snags In The Talks, But Democrats said there was indeed a sticking point: the Republicans' insistence that any deal include a new formula to hold down cost of living increases for Social Security recipients. Reid declared that a nonstarter., We're willing to make difficult concessions as part of a balanced, comprehensive agreement, he said, but we'll not agree to cut Social Security benefits as part of a small or short-term agreement, especially if that agreement gives more handouts to the rich., A short time later, at a closed-door meeting, Republicans decided to take that politically radioactive Social Security demand off the table. Their chief objection to what Democrats wanted, said Tennessee Republican Bob Corker, was that the president's party sought only to raise more revenues and spend more money., There's no deficit reduction in the offer that they're making pretty phenomenal, he said. And I don't think any American would want to support that kind of proposal., One big reason there's no deficit reduction, said Senate No. 2 Democrat Dick Durbin, is that Republicans themselves want some very costly items in the package., There's no deficit reduction when you give a higher estate-tax exemption and lower rate, and if you have a permanent fix on AMT, the alternative minimum tax, which costs $800 billion, he said. So when you put those two on the table, you're up to almost $1 trillion. And those are things they're insisting on., Determining What's Important, In a rare appearance on NBC's Meet the Press, President Obama said Republicans' actions belied claims they wanted to deal with the deficit in a serious way., The way they're behaving is that their only priority is making sure that tax breaks for the wealthiest Americans are protected, he said. That seems to be their only overriding, unifying theme. And at some point, I think what's going to be important is that they listen to the American people., Some Democrats vow they won't be bullied into something they'd regret just to avoid the cliff., If we get a good deal, fine, says Iowa Sen. Tom Harkin. But I've always said no deal is better than a bad deal because even if we go there is no real cliff, I've always said there's a slope anyway the world won't end., 'Disastrous' Consequences?, The world won't end, but business-as-usual may be disrupted. If Senate leaders can't get a deal, members of both parties say they'll step up., We can't very well just throw up our hands and give up, says Republican Susan Collins of Maine. The consequences are too disastrous for our economy and for the public trust in government. People are furious that we don't have a solution yet., All that's required, says Senate Finance Committee Chairman Max Baucus, is a little patience., I think we'll get this solved. It may take a day or two, maybe three, but we'll get it solved, he says., But there's only one day left of 2012. Even one day later, efforts to avert the cliff will have failed, and Congress will be left trying to claw its way back up.
Not so scary., America, if you're scared by all the talk you've been hearing about the fiscal cliff, take heart: There are reasons for people across the political spectrum to love the cliff., There's a lot for liberals to like in the fiscal cliff, says Matthew Yglesias, who writes wonky articles about economics for Slate., Take the spending cuts. Entitlement programs like Social Security and Medicaid that liberals generally support are left unaffected, while a large share of the cuts fall on the military, which many liberals would be happy to reduce anyway., The combination of tax hikes and spending cuts could eventually send the country into recession. But that probably won't happen, Yglesias says, because at some point in the next few weeks Congress will probably agree on a compromise., That's partly because going off the cliff will let Congress sell a tax increase as a tax cut. Simon Johnson, an economist at MIT, walked me through how that works., A big part of the fiscal cliff is the expiration of temporary tax cuts. So, for example, the 33 percent tax bracket will rise to 36 percent on Jan. 1., Say you think the ideal rate for income in this bracket should be higher than 33 percent. Say you think it should be 34 percent. On Monday, Dec. 31, 34 percent is a tax increase. On Tuesday, Jan. 1, it's a tax cut., Conservatives who worry that the government is borrowing too much money should love the cliff for a simple reason: It will cut the deficit., The federal government spends over $3.5 trillion every year on health care for the elderly, drones for the military, bridges, etc. But the government only brings $2.5 trillion in tax revenue. We borrow the remaining $1 trillion, and we're going to have to pay it back eventually., Going over the cliff paying more taxes and getting fewer government services means we borrow less. By the same token, it forces the country to pay up front for a bigger share of the government services we're consuming., It forces taxpayers to realize what they're paying, and I think that's a good thing, Russ Roberts, a libertarian economist at Stanford's Hoover Institution, told me.
The Surprising Truth About Moving Others, by Daniel H. Pink, Hardcover, 260 pages | purchase, More on this book:, The familiar image of the salesman in American culture hasn't always been a flattering one. Just think of Alec Baldwin as the verbally abusive motivator of two real estate salesmen in Glengarry Glen Ross., Daniel H. Pink, author of the new book To Sell is Human, says that this relentless, predator-style approach to selling has become outdated. He believes that the art of sales has changed more in the past 10 years than it did in the previous century., Pink joins NPR's David Greene to talk about the effect the Internet has had on selling and why he believes almost all American white-collar workers are now in sales., On why the brutal, Glengarry Glen Ross style of selling has become outdated, Well, most of what we know about sales was built for a world of information asymmetry the seller always had more information than the buyer. Twenty years ago, when [David] Mamet wrote that play that [was] made into a movie, when you walked into a Chevy dealer, the Chevy dealer knew a heck of a lot more about cars than you ever could ... you didn't have the adequate information. And so this is why we have the principle of caveat emptor, buyer beware. You gotta beware when the other guy knows a lot more than you., Well, something curious has happened in the last 10 years in that you can walk into a car dealership with the invoice price of the car, something that even the salesmen/women at car dealers didn't know too long ago. And so in a world of information parity, or at least something close to it, we've moved caveat emptor is still good advice, but equally good advice for the sellers is caveat venditor, seller beware., On why he thinks we're all in sales, There's an idea out there that salespeople have actually been obliterated by the Internet, which is just not supported by the facts. In 2000 ... about 1 in 9 American workers worked in sales. That is, their job was to convince someone else to buy something. So then, what's happened over the last 12 years? Explosion of new technologies. Today, 1 in 9 American workers works in sales. But I think what's interesting is that if you look at that other 8 in 9, they're in sales, too. That is, a huge percentage of what white-collar workers do on the job is what I call nonsales selling persuading, influencing, convincing other people to part with resources. Pitching ideas in meetings, asking the boss for a raise, trying to raise money from investors. And so, at some level, we're all in sales now., Daniel H. Pink is the author of five books about the changing world of work, including A Whole New Mind and Drive., Daniel H. Pink is the author of five books about the changing world of work, including A Whole New Mind and Drive., On why the best salespeople are ambiverts, not extroverts, We have this myth that extroverts are better salespeople. As a result, extroverts are more likely to enter sales; extroverts are more likely to get promoted in sales jobs. But if you look at the correlation between extroversion and actual sales performance that is, how many times the cash register actually rings the correlation's almost zero. It's really quite remarkable., Let's think about a spectrum, and say, on a scale from 1 to 7, where 1 is extremely introverted, 7 is extremely extroverted: The 6s and 7s the people who get hired, the gregarious, backslapping types of the stereotype they're not very good. OK, now, why? ... They're just spending too much time talking. ... They don't know when to shut up. They don't listen very well; they're not attuned to the other person; they sometimes can overwhelm people., Now ... does that mean that introverts are better? No. The 1s and 2s, they're not very good either. They often are not assertive enough. They're skittish about striking up conversations. What this new research and it's very exciting, it's accepted for publication but actually not published yet [says] is the people who do the best are what social psychologists call ambiverts. ... Not totally extroverted, not totally introverted. The 3s, 4s, and 5s. They know when to shut up; they know when to speak up. They know when to push; they know when to hold back. And so the best people at convincing, persuading others, whether in a traditional sales environment or in these other kinds of environments, are these ambiverts., On the link between improvisational theater skills and selling, One of the abilities that matters most is this ability of improvisation that is, if your perfectly attuned, superclear pitch goes awry, as it will, how do you respond? And the principles of improvisational theater help us out on that, things like saying 'Yes, and' instead of 'Yes, but,' ... It's constructive rather than deconstructive., [In one improvisational exercise] I had to sit face-to-face with this actually pretty senior executive at a television network, and he had to tell me something that was bothering him, and I had to look him in the eye when he told me that, but I couldn't respond to him for 15 seconds. ... The idea ... is that we tend to move too quickly, and what the best salespeople of any kind know is that it's really about listening; it's really about understanding the other person's perspective, hearing what they're really saying, and one really profound way to do that is to slow down.
Despite huge protests at Michigan's state capitol building in Lansing, Republican lawmakers in the state made the union stronghold the 24th right-to-work state in the country., Despite huge protests at Michigan's state capitol building in Lansing, Republican lawmakers in the state made the union stronghold the 24th right-to-work state in the country., This year was a tough one for organized labor., In June, Scott Walker the Wisconsin governor who banned collective bargaining for public employee unions survived a recall election., And, despite huge protests in Michigan, the union stronghold became the 24th right-to-work state, banning unions from requiring workers to sign up. That came just 10 months after Indiana passed a similar law., Harold Meyerson, editor-at-large of The American Prospect, says it's only the latest in years of mostly union defeats. Despite some bright spots, Meyerson tells weekends on All Things Considered host Jacki Lyden that the future for organized labor in the U.S. looks gloomy., On the state of unions after years of defeats, A lot of unions have gone into a somewhat understandable fetal curl. Organizing for most major unions has dried up. Meanwhile, wages, even at unionized companies are going down, because when you represent one unionized company in an ocean of non-unionized companies, you don't have much leverage., On the effects of organized labor's diminished power, Companies are sitting on well over a trillion dollars of their own cash. And the chief use their making of their cash is, chiefly, to buy back their own stock. This is happening at a time when wages have either been stuck or declining for some time, but no one is even raising the prospect of using some of their cash to give raises. And the reason for that, in large part, is that there's no bargaining table anymore at American corporations., On unionizing low-wage workers, There are efforts afoot to at least get some action in industries that people have long thought impossible to organize. Wal-Mart in particular, also fast-food chains in New York. I would expect to see more efforts along the Wal-Mart supply chain for instance, the warehouse workers. That would probably be the way to impact a company like Wal-Mart, because Wal-Mart is just too big and too spread-out to do anything frontally., On public employee unions, One of the things unions have to hope for is that they don't suffer massive loss of members in the public sector unions because that's really their remaining area of strength. Public sector workers are unionized at a rate way higher than the 7 percent in the private sector. And those are the unions that can still wage very effective political campaigns during the elections, can still get decent benefits and wages for their members. So they have to really work on making sure that laws like the ones in Wisconsin that just eviscerated those unions don't spread to other states.
President Obama went on the air to levy pressure on Congress Sunday as Senate leaders worked to negotiate a deal to avert the tax hikes and spending cuts known as the fiscal cliff., I was modestly optimistic yesterday, but we don't yet see an agreement, Obama said in an interview with NBC's Meet the Press taped on Saturday. Now the pressure's on Congress to produce., The president continued to make it clear he feels he's reached out to congressional Republicans, as the AP reports:, Obama says his offers to Republicans have been so fair that a lot of Democrats get mad at me. He cited a proposal he made to House Speaker John Boehner to reduce cost-of-living increases for Social Security beneficiaries., President Obama returned early from his holiday in Hawaii on Thursday for discussions on the fiscal cliff., President Obama returned early from his holiday in Hawaii on Thursday for discussions on the fiscal cliff., Republicans, Obama said, have had trouble saying yes to a number of repeated offers. It's worth noting that the only other appearance he's made on Meet the Press was at the height of the health care debate in 2009, another politically charged period where the president used the airtime to try to persuade viewers to his cause., From another Sunday talk show came a sign he may succeed. Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina said on Fox News Sunday that the odds of a last-minute deal are exceedingly good., This deal won't affect the debt situation; it will be a political victory for the president, and I hope we'll have the courage of our convictions when it comes time to raise the debt ceiling to fight for what we believe as Republicans, Graham said. But hats off to the president. He won., The Senate is scheduled to convene Sunday in a rare weekend session, but that's no guarantee of a vote. If it all falls through, the president said there's a backup plan. The first bill introduced in the new Congress, he said, would be a middle-class tax cut., Gun Control Legislation In 2013, The fiscal cliff wasn't the only subject Obama touched on in his Sunday morning interview. With the Newtown school shooting still fresh in Americans' minds, the president took on gun control. Reuters reports:, In his boldest terms yet, he vowed to rally the American people around an agenda to limit gun violence and said he still supports increased background checks and bans on assault weapons and high capacity bullet magazines., He aims to pass new gun control in the coming year, he said, and was doubtful of the NRA's proposal to put armed guards in school., I am not going to prejudge the recommendations that are given to me. I am skeptical that the only answer is putting more guns in schools. And I think the vast majority of the American people are skeptical that that somehow is going to solve our problem, he said., 'Good Leads' In Benghazi, There are also very good leads on the attacks in Benghazi, Libya, the president said. Reuters again:, Obama told NBC's 'Meet the Press' that the United States would carry out all of the recommendations put forward in an independent review of the Sept. 11 attack on the U.S. mission in Benghazi in which Ambassador Christopher Stevens was killed., 'We're not going to pretend that this was not a problem. This was a huge problem. And we're going to implement every single recommendation that's been put forward,' Obama said in the interview, referring to security issues identified in the review., Sen. Chuck Hagel For Defense Secretary?, And though he's made no decisions, the president also voiced support for former Republican Sen. Chuck Hagel as a possible candidate for U.S. defense secretary., I've served with Chuck Hagel, the president said. I know him. He is a patriot. He is somebody who has done extraordinary work both in the United States Senate, somebody who served this country with valor in Vietnam., Hagel critics point to comments he made in 1998 about gay people serving in the diplomatic corps, as The Washington Post reports:, At the time, Hagel said an 'openly aggressively gay' diplomat might be an ineffective representative of American values., On this topic, Graham did not salute the president., I think a lot of Republicans and Democrats are very concerned about Chuck Hagel's positions on Iran sanctions, his views toward Israel, Hamas and Hezbollah, and that there is wide and deep concern about his policies. All of us like him as a person, Graham said, but there would be very little Republican support for his nomination. At the end of the day, there will be very few votes.
Pedestrians pass the Dow Jones display ticker in Times Square on Wednesday in New York. U.S. shoppers spent cautiously this holiday season, a disappointment for retailers that slashed prices to lure people into stores and now must hope for a post-Christmas burst of spending., Pedestrians pass the Dow Jones display ticker in Times Square on Wednesday in New York. U.S. shoppers spent cautiously this holiday season, a disappointment for retailers that slashed prices to lure people into stores and now must hope for a post-Christmas burst of spending., Several large retailers took a leap of faith on what they thought would be a gangbuster holiday season, hiring more seasonal workers this year than last., Sales during the two months before Christmas weren't all that stunning, however, and that's meant fewer opportunities for seasonal workers., Some of them worked vastly fewer hours than they expected. Onieka O'Kieffe, 23, was hired by Lush Cosmetics in midtown Manhattan for the holiday season. Lush told her she'd be working 20 to 30 hours per week, she says, but instead, she's getting only 10 hours a week at most. That's bad news for someone who has a few thousand dollars of credit card debt. O'Kieffe says she's losing out on hours because Lush just hired too many people this holiday., There's been times where there's 10 of us in the store and there's no customers, O'Kieffe says., A spokesperson for Lush says the company urged its stores to ramp up hiring at the beginning of the holiday season, and to scale back on workers' hours depending on foot traffic in stores and how heavily the stores were staffed. The spokesperson added that no seasonal employee at Lush was guaranteed minimum hours., A Sluggish Holiday, Recent data suggest holiday retail business increased this year, but just barely. An estimate by MasterCard Inc.'s SpendingPulse unit shows sales grew 0.7 percent. That's the slowest rate since 2008, when retailers were feeling the worst of the recession., When profits shrink like that, seasonal labor costs are the easiest cost to cut, says Diane Swonk, an economist at Mesirow Financial., The problem is, yes, these are disposable workers. I hate to say that, because I don't mean that about the people, but the reality is, when you got to cut hours, you do cut hours, Swonk says., Retailers had a lot of other problems to tangle with this holiday season. Superstorm Sandy forced stores in some regions to temporarily close. Swonk says New York and New Jersey alone account for 13 percent of all retail sales in the country., Then there's that looming fiscal cliff that's getting the blame for slumping consumer confidence in December. Retailers say to make up for lost business, they now have to resort to huge discounts after Christmas, which will further eat into profits., But Kathy Grannis of the National Retail Federation points out it's nowhere near as bad as it was four years ago., The panicked, unplanned promotions are what we saw in 2008, when inventory had not moved and retailers had no choice but to throw deep discounts on everything in their stores and on their websites, Grannis says. We're very far from that level of panic right now., But don't assume this holiday season is a bust just yet, Grannis says; the last week of December usually rakes in about 15 percent of a store's entire holiday business. On top of that, early January is when people start streaming into stores to use their gift cards., Too Little, Too Late, Browsing sweaters in midtown Manhattan on a recent afternoon, O'Kieffe says it's kind of a bummer when you work in retail because you love retail, but you can't purchase most of the what you see. Even when it's on deep discount after a lackluster holiday season., It does kind of suck that it's like, you work so hard and so long, and you can't really afford to buy anything you want, O'Kieffe says., Because she couldn't get enough hours at Lush, O'Kieffe's now working two jobs. But her hours are totally unpredictable, and sometimes her two shifts will conflict so she has to drop one of them. Other times, two jobs mean an 11-hour work day, with a two-hour subway ride in the middle., Sometimes I have days off from both jobs, and on those days off, I usually spend them in bed because I'm so tired, O'Kieffe says. Or I don't even leave the house because I'm so tired from working both jobs., Even with those two jobs, she says, she's barely able to cover her expenses. She's bracing for more stressful days ahead, since Lush has already told O'Kieffe her seasonal job won't last into January.
Andrew Borakove was a television comedy writer in Hollywood when he realized he had to make a life change., A vision of a gong appeared before me, and I said a gong? I've never thought of that, he says. And I started doing research and I said, 'Yep, I could maybe sell gongs for a living.' , So he moved with his wife and two children to Lincoln, Neb., and opened Gongs Unlimited, an online gong shop. That's where former host of weekends on All Things Considered Guy Raz and producer Brent Baughman found him earlier this year., Borakove's doors have been open for eight years, somehow surviving the recession. We've watched the world go up and down, but when you're selling gongs, there's no up or down, it's just round, he says. We start from the center and radiate out., Last time we spoke with him, he told us car dealerships were a flourishing customer of his hitting the gong for every auto sale. We wanted to know, what's going on now?, We just recently had a gong on [the Fox TV show] The Mindy Project, he says. It was the centerpiece of a whole scene!, But that's not all Borakove's been up to. In 2012, gongs went green. Borakove and the rest of his gong gang have been upcycling to make gong stands. I took roll bars that were left over from some sort of manufacturing for Jeeps, and we made gong stands out of stuff that was going to be thrown away or scraped., Borakove's message for 2013? You know how the kids used to say 'peace out'? I'm saying peace in.
Longshoremen and East Coast and Gulf Coast port operators have agreed to an extension on labor negotiations, a federal mediator said Friday, averting a potentially crippling strike that would have halted container traffic at many of the nation's largest seaports., Update at 4:45 p.m. ET: The temporary deal extends the contract to Feb. 6. , George H. Cohen, director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service, which has overseen negotiations that were set to expire at midnight Saturday, announced the extension on Friday. Cohen said the key sticking point bonuses paid to its 14,650 workers on every container loaded had been agreed upon in principle by the parties., The parties have further agreed to an additional 30 days ... during which time the parties shall negotiate all remaining outstanding Master Agreement issues, he said., The impasse had been dubbed the container cliff, with all the incumbent warnings of dire consequences to the economy. It would have been the first walkout by longshoremen in the U.S. since 2002 when a West Coast strike lasted 10 days and the first such work stoppage on the East Coast since 1977., A strike would have disrupted 40 percent of the nation's container traffic by shutting down the third- and fourth-largest U.S. ports by volume New York/New Jersey and Savannah, Ga.; and 12 others., The National Retail Federation said such a strike could cost $1 billion a day, although that figure has been disputed., It's not immediately clear what broke the logjam, but the Obama administration stepped up pressure on Friday, with White House spokesman Matt Lehrich calling for a deal to be done as quickly as possible., Meanwhile, Florida Gov. Rick Scott had urged the president to invoke the Taft-Hartley Act to break a strike if necessary. Taft-Hartley was last used by President George W. Bush to break the 2002 West Coast port strike., The labor dispute came at a time when East Coast and Gulf Coast port operators are spending billions of dollars on new infrastructure to accommodate bigger ships that will be coming through the Panama Canal after the inauguration of a major widening of the lock system there.
Publishers are finding that flexible pricing on e-books can help bring in new readers., Publishers are finding that flexible pricing on e-books can help bring in new readers., What counts as a book these days, in a world of Kindles, Nooks and iPads and eager talk about new platforms and distribution methods?, Traditional publishers are traveling a long and confusing road into the digital future. To begin with, here's the conventional wisdom about publishing: E-books are destroying the business model., People expect them to be cheaper than physical books, and that drives down prices. But the story's not that simple. For one thing, digital publishers have the same problem that record labels do: piracy. And there's just not the same stigma attached to pirating an e-book as there is to holding up a Barnes &amp; Noble., It turns out, though, that some publishers are doing pretty well despite the piracy problem. We've had an incredible year, says Sourcebooks President Dominique Raccah. Last year was the best year in the company's history. This year we beat that, which I didn't think was even possible. Raccah adds that her company is doing well because of digital publishing, not in spite of it. It's been an amazing ride, she says., It turns out there are some huge advantages at least for publishers. A big one: The price of an e-book isn't fixed the way it is with physical books. Ten years ago, a publisher would have sent out its books to the bookstore with the price stamped on the cover. After that, it was done the publisher couldn't put it on sale to sell more books., The exciting thing about digital books is that we actually get to test and price differently, Raccah says. We can even price on a weekly basis. Once publishers have this tool, the ability to adjust prices in an instant, they can do whatever they want with that tool like use it to get publicity. That's what Little, Brown did with presidential historian Robert Dallek's book on John F. Kennedy, An Unfinished Life., In the middle of November, Little, Brown dropped the price from $9.99 to $2.99 for 24 hours the digital equivalent of a one-day-only sale. That sparks sales; it gets people talking about it, says Terry Adams, a publisher with Little, Brown. You've just expanded the market., Dropping the price of An Unfinished Life did get people's attention. Here, we had an opportunity to increase the audience, Adams says. The book originally published in 2003 launched itself back onto the best-seller list. And because Little, Brown could raise the price again, it wasn't stuck with a money loser., This kind of promotion leads to discovery, something that used to just happen in brick and mortar bookstores. But with fewer of those around, publishers are using price to create discovery. It's like making music available for streaming, so that someone will discover an artist and buy a record. And speaking of music, if you read the new e-book 40 Years of Queen, you'll find it full of links. Links to iTunes, where you can buy the music you've been reading about. That's another huge advantage of e-books: Publishers can sell you things inside your book. It's still quite rare, but that's where digital publishing is headed., But enough with the good news. There's still one big problem putting pressure on publishers (besides thieves). A problem you may have noticed, actually, just in the past day or so., We actually don't have a good gifting tradition yet for e-books, says Sourcebooks' Raccah. Despite all the advances in reading technology, physical books are still the best Christmas presents.
With negotiations to avoid the fiscal cliff uncertain at best, the Obama administration is trying to tamp down anxiety in the federal workforce., The administration's message to various federal agencies is that there will be little immediate effect on public employees from the budget cuts scheduled to take effect next week if a deal is not reached. Treasury Department employees, for instance, were told not to expect day to day operations to change dramatically on or immediately after January 2., For workers, of course, that's good news., What they've been telling the employees is that the agencies should use January as a transition period, says Colleen Kelley, president of the NTEU, which represents some 150,000 federal employees, including those at Treasury, and that there wouldn't really be any direct effect on them for the month of January., That's because while most federal agencies will see their budgets cut by more than 8 percent if the automatic spending cuts take effect, they'll have the rest of the fiscal year to absorb the reduction. And lawmakers and the president might still reach a deal to avoid the cuts., But if they can't, Kelley says, it will mean furloughs or layoffs for some government workers., If it happens, most likely agencies are going to have to be looking at furloughs, she says. That will be the only way that they could meet those kinds of budget cuts if that happens., For now, federal agencies are taking a wait-and-see attitude. Yet that's posing other problems., Taxes are set to go up Jan. 1 if there's no action between now and then. But employers have been given no guidance as to how much to take out of their workers' paychecks., Treasury has not issued any withholding tables because they have been waiting for Congress to do something, says John Roth, a federal tax analyst at CCH, which provides tax and accounting information. So a lot of the payroll companies are kind of just sort of like, 'Well, what do we do?' , Roth says it's pretty much impossible to do any tax planning with all the uncertainty., And it's not just income taxes that will go up. The payroll tax cut is set to expire, the child tax credit will be cut in half, capital gains and dividends will be taxed at higher rates and, if nothing is done, the alternative minimum tax, or AMT, will apply to lower income levels., To use a technical term, it will be a big mess., But budget watcher Stan Collender says that may be what it takes to spur Congress to act. I'm pretty sure that once we get over the fiscal cliff, once John Boehner gets re-elected as speaker, the ability of cutting a deal will get a little bit greater particularly as the peasants start to storm the castle with pitchforks and complain about the lack of certainty in the tax code and with spending, he says. I don't think it's going to be a big deal, but I do think they'll get something in January and then we're going to refight everything out in February and March on the debt ceiling., In other words, Collender believes we can expect the back and forth between the president and Congress to last into the spring., So, happy New Year!
Toyota has agreed to spend more than $1 billion to resolve lawsuits stemming from unintended acceleration cases. In November, the company displayed new cars at the Los Angeles Auto show., Toyota has agreed to spend more than $1 billion to resolve lawsuits stemming from unintended acceleration cases. In November, the company displayed new cars at the Los Angeles Auto show., Owners of Toyota vehicles that experienced sudden and unintended acceleration have reached a settlement that could require the carmaker to pay as much as $1.4 billion in claims, according to the auto maker and the law firm representing Toyota customers., U.S. District Court Judge James Selna, at whose direction the many lawsuits over the runaway car fears were consolidated in 2010, will review the proposed settlement Friday., The plaintiffs' law firm, Hagens Berman, says the final settlement has a value of between $1.2 and $1.4 billion, with the money going toward either direct payments to consumers or to pay for work on their vehicles specifically, the installation of a brake-override system that reduces a car's power output if both the gas and brake are applied at once., This was a difficult decision especially since reliable scientific evidence and multiple independent evaluations have confirmed the safety of Toyota's electronic throttle control systems, said Christopher P. Reynolds, chief legal officer of Toyota Motor North America. However, we concluded that turning the page on this legacy legal issue through the positive steps we are taking is in the best interests of the company, our employees, our dealers and, most of all, our customers., Reynolds' remarks were made in a statement posted on the company's website. Toyota has established a separate site especially to handle questions and claims from owners., The proposal includes $250 million in compensation for the reduced value of vehicles sold by Toyota owners between Sept. 1, 2009 and Dec. 31, 2010. An additional $250 million would compensate owners whose vehicles aren't eligible for a brake-override system., The amount consumers receive depends on the model and year of their Toyota, and the state in which the car was purchased, according to the release., While reports of unintended acceleration in Toyota vehicles made headlines a few years ago, the carmaker wasn't alone in being suspected of building runaway cars, as they came to be known., As NPR's investigative unit reported in 2010, other automakers have had high rates of complaints in some model years, including Volkswagen, Volvo and Honda in some cases resolving the apparent problems through evolving technology and recalls., In Toyota's case, the carmaker recalled more than 8 million vehicles to deal with the claims; its executives also testified on Capitol Hill, as the reported cases spread., And in 2011, a Transportation Department investigation concluded that the dangerous incidents did not stem from faulty electronics. NPR's Tracy Samilton reported that the carmaker admitted that in some cases loose floor mats could get trapped on gas pedals, and that some gas pedals had become sticky, and wouldn't always fully release., But Tracy also said that NASA engineers who had looked at the problem found an additional possible cause: pedal misapplication, or what one dealer termed driver error., This past January, an independent panel found that no fatalities occurred because of the car's electronics, as NPR's Sonari Glinton reported., On the business side of things, Toyota says that it will record a one-time, $1.1 billion pre-tax charge against earnings to cover the estimated costs of the economic loss settlement and possible resolution costs of civil litigation brought in California by the District Attorney of Orange County and an investigation by a multi-state group of Attorneys General stemming from previous recalls.
Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke speaks during a news conference in Washington on Dec. 12. Some economists worry the Fed has set the stage for inflation as well as stock and housing bubbles by keeping interest rates low., Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke speaks during a news conference in Washington on Dec. 12. Some economists worry the Fed has set the stage for inflation as well as stock and housing bubbles by keeping interest rates low., The Federal Reserve continued to keep its foot on the accelerator in 2012, using unusual tactics to try to boost economic growth. But there's disagreement among economists about whether the Fed's policies were effective or whether the risks to the economy outweighed the rewards., Chairman Ben Bernanke and the Fed employed two main tools in 2012, to try to boost economic growth Operation Twist, in which the Fed bought long-term Treasury bonds, and a program to purchase mortgage-backed securities. Both were aimed at driving down long-term interest rates., A Boost For Housing, Mark Zandi of Moody's Analytics says the Fed's effort has been a big plus for the housing market., It's lowered mortgage rates, which has helped lots of homeowners refinance their mortgages and lower their monthly payments, Zandi says. It's certainly been key to turning the housing market around, and housing is vital to the strength of the broader economy. It's helped to lift stock prices, and stocks are very important to collective thinking and people's perception about how well we're doing., And, Zandi says, the Fed's efforts have kept the value of the dollar low, which has helped U.S. exports., Nariman Behravesh, chief economist for the research firm IHS Global Insight, also thinks the Fed's policies provided an important boost for the economy in 2012., You know people say, 'Oh, it's done more harm than good.' I think that's nonsense. It has had a small, but nevertheless positive impact in particular on housing, Behravesh says., Asset Bubbles Feared, Harvard professor Martin Feldstein says the Fed's policies in 2012 and for the past few years have created a risk of higher inflation. And he says there's serious risk that they're producing asset price bubbles that, like all bubbles when they burst, could be very damaging., Feldstein believes the Fed's success in pushing long-term interest rates lower is inflating the value of assets like homes and stocks and bonds. And when the Fed has to reverse course, as the economy picks up, the prices of those assets will take a tumble and damage the economy., It feels good now while it's happening but I think it lays a trap for us later on, Feldstein says., Peter Fisher, a former Treasury official who's now senior managing director at the Wall Street firm BlackRock, says the Fed's policy of pushing long-term interest rates to extremely low levels comes with trade-offs., On the one hand you can be holding down the cost of refinancing a mortgage and hope to encourage people to borrow, Fisher says. On the other hand by holding down the long end you are discouraging lenders., An Effect On Banks, That's because when rates get extremely low the profit margins that lenders can make on loans shrink, so banks make fewer loans and credit gets tight. Despite his concerns, Fisher generally supports the Fed's actions, except for Operation Twist., Moody's Zandi argues the economy would be significantly worse if the Fed had demurred., If the Fed had not engaged in the extraordinary actions, the economy would feel a lot worse, he says. You know, we'd have an unemployment rate closer to 9 percent than 8 percent; that's a palpable difference., Harvard's Feldstein says it's likely to be a couple of years before we see the negative effects of inflation and asset bubbles. But clearly Bernanke and most of the Fed's governors think the rewards of the policy outweigh the risks. They've made clear they'll very likely hold rates low throughout 2013.
A sold sign outside a home under construction in Peoria, Ill., in October., A sold sign outside a home under construction in Peoria, Ill., in October., Home prices were up 4.3 percent in October from the same month a year before in the 20 major U.S. cities where the data are tracked, according to the latest S&P;/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices report., Looking over this report, and considering other data on housing starts and sales, it is clear that the housing recovery is gathering strength, economist David Blitzer, , chairman of the Index Committee at S&P; Dow Jones Indices, says in the report. Higher year-over-year price gains plus strong performances in the southwest and California, regions that suffered during the housing bust, confirm that housing is now contributing to the economy., The city-by-city changes in prices; October 2012 vs. October 2011:, Atlanta: 4.9 percentBoston: 1.6 percentCharlotte: 4.1 percentChicago: -1.3 percentCleveland: 1.8 percent, Dallas: 4.6 percentDenver: 6.9 percentDetroit: 10.0 percentLas Vegas: 8.4 percentLos Angeles: 6.2 percent, Miami: 8.5 percentMinneapolis: 9.2 percentNew York: -1.2 percentPhoenix: 21.7 percentPortland: 5.2 percent, San Diego: 6.0 percentSan Francisco: 8.9 percentSeattle: 5.7 percentTampa: 5.9 percentWashington, D.C.: 4.4 percent, 20-city composite: 4.3 percent
Raj Rajaratnam, center, billionaire co-founder of Galleon Group, is surrounded by photographers as leaves Manhattan federal court May 11 after being convicted of insider trading charges., Raj Rajaratnam, center, billionaire co-founder of Galleon Group, is surrounded by photographers as leaves Manhattan federal court May 11 after being convicted of insider trading charges., It was another busy year for federal authorities pursuing insider trading cases. Seventy-five people have now been charged in the last three years, and investigators say that success comes largely from their decision to attack insider trading the way they take down the Mafia and drug cartels with tools such as wiretaps, informants and cooperators., The story behind how the government decided to go after insider trading as hard as it goes after the mob is really just a story about dead ends., It was a product of sitting around the table and saying, 'OK, nothing else has worked. Where do we go now?' said FBI Agent David Chaves, sitting in the FBI's New York field office in downtown Manhattan., No Willing Cooperators, Chaves and his colleague Patrick Carroll head securities fraud and white collar crime units at the FBI. These guys have taken down Bernie Madoff, Martha Stewart and WorldCom chief Bernie Ebbers. But when they started getting whispers more than 10 years ago that there was an epidemic of insider trading at hedge funds, Carroll said, they were stumped., We had people who were telling us things, but we didn't have anybody who was in a conspiracy that was going to tell on what the others did, he said., Patrick Carroll (left) and David Chaves head white collar crime and securities fraud units at the FBI's New York office. Their team pursued insider trading with some of the same tactics used on organized crime and drug cartels., Patrick Carroll (left) and David Chaves head white collar crime and securities fraud units at the FBI's New York office. Their team pursued insider trading with some of the same tactics used on organized crime and drug cartels., What they needed were real sources people who did business with the insider traders. But, as Carroll says, how do you get high-flying financiers with everything to lose to flip and cooperate with you?, Here's the product I'm selling: 'Tell on your friends, give me your money and go to jail.' How would you like to sell that product? Carroll said. It's very hard to develop sources in industries like the financial markets primarily because when somebody does cooperate, they're done. They're not going to work in the financial markets again., Carroll and Chaves said the hedge fund industry is a tight-knit circle. These were people who went to the same elite schools, who knew each other's families. Penetrating these networks as an undercover agent would have been really tough because there was an instant suspicion of outsiders., By 2006, attention had begun to focus on a hedge fund manager named Raj Rajaratnam. Prosecutors would later accuse him of making more $72 million trading on non-public information. Carroll and Chaves said agents tried recruiting cooperators for the case by trailing people for months., We might be lifting weights with them in the gym. We will be behind them buying coffee until the given day when we feel that we have enough information and leverage to have them cooperate, said Chaves. And there've been instances where the clerk would ask the subject, 'How would you like your coffee?' And we would answer on his behalf, 'Two sugars and cream. Please come with us.', The Decision To Wiretap , But the problem was, most of these people they confronted would just lawyer up and resist. What the feds needed was something to make people cooperate. And in early 2008, they decided, let's do a wiretap. Many of them, like Carroll, were longtime organized crime and narcotics investigators. They knew, in those worlds, when you needed leverage to make someone cooperate, you recorded them planning something criminal., Once we did that, now when we knock on your door, it's not like, 'Oh, the FBI's here. Big whoop. Lie to them or just ignore them, or hire a lawyer and they'll go away,' Carroll said. Now it's like, 'Oh boy, I have a problem.', Wiretaps weren't completely brand new to white collar cases. The FBI had already been using them in market manipulation and public corruption investigations., But bringing the tactic into insider trading cases was unprecedented, and people close to the investigations say at least a dozen individuals have decided to cooperate after discovering the government had wiretap evidence against them., Carroll said he and his squad were constantly aware of the tremendous intrusion into privacy wiretaps posed, We use it when we have exhausted all other techniques and we believe it is the right thing to do to disrupt and dismantle an organization, he said., Rajaratnam's lawyers would later argue that the wiretaps were never properly authorized., Wiretaps As A Source Of Direct Evidence, The wiretaps weren't only useful for recruiting cooperators they also provided powerful, direct evidence of insider trading., For Andrew Michaelson, that was the perfect break. For almost two years starting in 2006, he had been leading a parallel investigation into Rajaratnam by the Securities and Exchange Commission. Michaelson analyzed trading records, reviewed all of Rajaratnam's instant messages for more than a year and even took his testimony., But without wiretaps, Michaelson said, it's extremely difficult collecting evidence of insider trading against top hedge fund executives., Hedge funds, particularly long/short equity funds, are buying and selling stock all the time. So the fact that the hedge fund, say, bought a stock right after a phone call means less because they had also bought the stock just before the phone call, Michaelson said., He added that hedge funds routinely receive analyst reports, and some reports might urge the fund to buy a certain stock, while other reports might tell the fund to sell that same stock. Therefore, after any trading activity, a hedge fund manager could almost always point to an analyst report as the reason for why the fund made a particular trade., Wiretaps allowed investigators to listen in on the skyscrapers of midtown Manhattan for the first time and build insider trading cases with more than circumstantial evidence., Rajaratnam was convicted in May after a trial featuring more than 2,400 taped phone conversations. Many of those recordings included Rajaratnam disclosing over the phone that he got an inside tip and was planning to trade on it., Rajaratnam's lawyers have appealed his conviction on the ground that the wiretaps were illegal., Rajat Gupta, a former Goldman Sachs board member and close friend to Rajaratnam, was convicted this year., Now prosecutors are said to be closing in another hedge fund giant billionaire Steven Cohen. And investigators say all these cases, and others, cropped up because a bunch of scared people heard their voices on wiretaps and started coughing up information.
A lone employee oversees Hewlett-Packard workstations being assembled at a plant on Jan. 1, 1993. Huge improvements in computer technology propelled the economy during that decade., A lone employee oversees Hewlett-Packard workstations being assembled at a plant on Jan. 1, 1993. Huge improvements in computer technology propelled the economy during that decade., Throughout the debate over taxes and the fiscal cliff, there's been a lot of looking backward to the 1990s. The economic expansion of the 1990s was the longest in recorded American history., Democrats say the economy thrived under the leadership of President Bill Clinton, including his tax rate increase on high earners. Republicans say government didn't spend as much then and that growth didn't really take off until the GOP took control of Congress in 1995., So what actually happened in the '90s? What made them tick?, A Unique Boom, First, some numbers. Unemployment averaged just 5.7 percent in the '90s. The stock market returned 18 percent a year for the decade. Inflation was tame. And the federal government actually ran surpluses for a few years., The '90s was a very special period that's unlikely to be repeated for a while, says Mohamed El-Erian, CEO of PIMCO, the world's largest bond fund., Many of the developments worked to the advantage of the U.S. El-Erian says the Cold War was over and new markets were opening around the world., Not only was there a peace dividend in terms of reallocating resources but there were more people to sell to and there was cheaper labor, so the U.S., as the dominant consumer and dominant producer at that time, benefited disproportionately from what was going on globally, says El-Erian, who President Obama is appointing as chairman of an advisory group on global economic development., Domestically, the economic mojo was working too., Harvard economist Dale Jorgenson says those little microchips being pumped out in Silicon Valley were transformational. As they got faster, cheaper and more powerful, the computer revolution reached into the workplace., There was an incredible boom in information technology equipment and software, says Jorgenson, who has written extensively about the productivity gains of the '90s. People who hadn't been using information technology found they were able to apply it in their jobs. People who had been using it were upgrading their products very quickly., 'A Story About Microchips', As the president and the Democrats like to point out, the economy did just fine after tax rates on high earners were raised in 1993. Tax rates were also cut on capital gains in 1997., Jorgenson doesn't think either change did much to fuel the boom., It was entirely a story about microchips, he says., John O'Farrell, a partner in the Silicon Valley venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz, agrees that huge improvements in computer technology both software and hardware propelled the economy., The U.S. really led this entire shift in the way the world works, O'Farrell says., What he remembers is how the Internet unlocked the ability to communicate., In 1997, O'Farrell left his job with a landline phone company to join a broadband startup, @Home Network., I was part of tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands of talented, smart, experienced people from all around the world, from other industries often, to take advantage of this enormous explosion of creativity, O'Farrell says., He says Washington wasn't as central to the economy back then. The real action was in Silicon Valley, New York and Hollywood., Washington's Role, El-Erian, the PIMCO CEO, says Washington did make a positive contribution. The Federal Reserve finally conquered inflation. And the budget was under control., Government played a large role domestically and globally, but it was as an enabler as opposed to someone directly involved in the economy., &ldquo; The irony of capitalism is that stability tends to encourage excesses. Excesses encourage bubbles. Bubbles encourage crises., - Mohamed El-Erian, CEO of PIMCO , Now, it would be wrong to leave the impression that the era was some kind of economic utopia. There was plenty of froth over e-commerce. Online retailers with no plausible business model were hyped breathlessly by stock research analysts. The iconic image of the dot-com bubble was the doglike sock puppet that starred in commercials for online retailer Pets.com. Money-losing startups like Pets.com imploded., And some big highfliers later turned out to be fraudulent Enron, WorldCom. Home prices rose sharply late in the decade. Everyone knows how that ended., El-Erian says in economic cycles there can be too much of a good thing., So the irony of capitalism is that stability tends to encourage excesses. Excesses encourage bubbles. Bubbles encourage crises, he says., El-Erian says boom-to-bust is a pattern. But it's not an ironclad rule. He thinks that the financial meltdown could have been avoided., And he says despite their current bickering and dithering, Washington politicians could avoid a different kind of crisis over the budget and the debt that's coming due.
Alan Mulally, president and CEO of Ford Motor Co., stands next to the Lincoln MKZ. For the first time ever, Ford will promote the Lincoln brand during the Super Bowl., Alan Mulally, president and CEO of Ford Motor Co., stands next to the Lincoln MKZ. For the first time ever, Ford will promote the Lincoln brand during the Super Bowl., GM, Ford and Chrysler are turning their focus to selling luxury cars something they haven't succeeded at in decades. They're hoping that success in the competitive but lucrative luxury sector will signal that the U.S. auto industry's comeback is complete., If you've fallen from the luxury space and the reputation of the brand has been damaged, you have to now go out and make dramatic changes, says Marshal Cohen, a retail analyst who specializes in luxury. You have to really clearly articulate to the consumer the reasons why this is a luxury product., He says to regain luxury status, a company has to not only improve the quality of its products, it has to change the minds of consumers., And sometimes that can take a long time, particularly with a product like an automobile that has low frequency you don't go out and buy an automobile every couple of weeks like you do some fashion items or some footwear products, Cohen says. So it makes it a little bit more challenging to go out and change the image of the brand and you have to have the consumer become the billboard or your spokesperson to help you do that., This is important because the luxury car represent huge profits. Lincoln, which is owned by Ford, is trying to rebrand itself. The company recently changed its name from just Lincoln to Lincoln Motor Co. And it's introducing new cars meant to shake off its stodgy image., Cadillac, which is owned by GM, has introduced a new car, the ATS, which is meant to compete with the Europeans., Michelle Krebs, an analyst with Edmunds.com, says luxury is vital to the future of the American car companies., In a brand new commercial for the 300, the car company brought Berry Gordy, the founder of Motown records, out of retirement hawk its brand., It's important globally. Cadillac is ramping it up in China, which is a huge luxury car market, Krebs says. If you're going to go into emerging markets like that, where wealth is building, you gotta have luxury brands. Those markets are very sensitive to the image of those brands., None of the American brands make into the top five for sales or ratings. Cadillac may have an image problem, but the name Cadillac still has a meaning. Say something like He's the Cadillac of radio reporters, you know what that means., Krebs says it's much harder for Ford to turn the Lincoln brand around., It was always clear what Cadillac was. Everybody knows the El Dorado from the 1950s and the kind of cutting-edge design and always ahead on technology, Krebs says. What is Lincoln? I mean, that's a challenge., Apparently the executives at Lincoln aren't 100 percent sure either., Lincoln Motor Co. turned to social media and to Jimmy Fallon, who's 38, to get young buyers. In an ad campaign for the new MKZ, Lincoln hired the comedian to encourage and curate tweets about road trips., What they're going to do is and I don't know why they're going to put all of this into a commercial, Fallon says in a video about the campaign, called #steerthescript., While the American luxury-car makers figure out what their images will be, the Japanese and European automakers already have a place in the minds and garages of consumers., Detroit carmakers have solved a lot of serious problems in the past few years, including reducing labor costs, turning profits on small cars and improving quality. But, Cohen and Krebs say, selling luxury cars might be the hardest part of the turnaround.
Construction workers build a home in Palo Alto, Calif. A real turnaround seemed to take hold in the housing sector in 2012 after years of fits and starts., Construction workers build a home in Palo Alto, Calif. A real turnaround seemed to take hold in the housing sector in 2012 after years of fits and starts., After years of recession and slow recovery, maybe you didn't notice. But it turns out, 2012 was a fairly good year for the U.S. economy., The Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index has risen nearly 14 percent this year and the unemployment rate has fallen to 7.7 percent, the lowest point in four years. Inflation and interest rates have stayed low, allowing families to cut their debt loads., Consumers are feeling better now, said Nariman Behravesh, chief economist for IHS Global Insight, a forecasting firm. Compared with December 2007, when the Great Recession was just starting, the burdens on consumers have eased quite a bit, he said., Final data aren't in yet for the full year, but in the period from July through September, U.S. household net worth rose by 2.7 percent compared with the previous three months, according to the Federal Reserve. Combined with overall economic growth of 3.1 percent in that same period, the pace of improvement both for individuals and corporations could be described as decent, though far from robust., Perhaps the key to the overall improvement has been the fairly steady growth in job creation. Employers have been adding an average of 151,000 jobs each month in 2012., Job growth was not great, but it was good enough to make people feel like things are getting better, Behravesh said., That potent combination of greater job security, lower bill payments and rising wealth sent shoppers heading off to car dealerships, malls and restaurants for most of the year., To be sure, the fourth quarter had big problems that very likely reduced the growth rate as the year wound down. Hurricane Sandy depressed retail sales and jobs in the New York-New Jersey region, and the budget negotiations drama in Washington depressed consumer sentiment all over the country, said Tom Porcelli, chief U.S. economist for RBC Capital Markets., He added that the child murders in Newtown, Conn., may have discouraged some holiday trips to the mall as the mood of the country turned somber in the run-up to Christmas. As the year draws to an end, you have a consumer moving sideways, Porcelli said., But most economists believe the effects of those recent problems will not linger long into the new year and that when economic historians look back on 2012, they may see it as the year when the battered U.S. economy finally turned a corner., Here are some of the glad tidings that Americans might want to celebrate., Autos, Consumers went car shopping again, largely because their old vehicles were wearing out. As 2012 was beginning, the average age of vehicles on the road was running at nearly 11 years a record high., That meant millions of people were itching to get to a showroom. Sales strengthened throughout the year and by November, the industry was selling vehicles at a pace of 15.5 million a year the best performance since February 2008., Housing, Home construction started to tank in 2006, and its plunge pushed the country into the Great Recession five years ago this month. The number of housing starts tumbled from a pace of more than 2 million units a year at the peak of the boom to around a half million a year during the worst of the downturn in 2009., Between 2009 and 2011, housing indicators bumped around on the bottom, with listless upturns quickly fading. But this year, a real turnaround took hold. By fall, housing starts were up to an annual rate of nearly 900,000 units the best pace in four years., And prices too have ticked up after the dramatic slide that started in 2006. In the country's 100 largest metropolitan areas, prices rose at an average of 0.5 percent after adjusting for inflation in the third quarter, according to a Brookings Institution economic index., The rise in metropolitan home prices indicates that a broadly rooted recovery may be under way in the housing market, said Alec Friedhoff, a research analyst and lead developer of the index., Energy, The U.S. energy industry is suddenly and dramatically expanding, thanks to the new technologies and drilling techniques that are unleashing supplies of oil and gas. As a result, energy companies are gearing up to train and hire many more workers. In North Dakota, for example, hiring has been so strong in the energy sector that the state's unemployment rate has fallen to just 3.1 percent., For the moment, big energy companies like Exxon Mobil and Shell are seeing lackluster earnings because of relatively weak prices, especially for natural gas. But for workers, the outlook keeps getting brighter as it becomes clearer that America has abundant energy resources. Studies suggest the unconventional oil and gas resources could lead to the creation of nearly 2 million jobs in less than two decades., Retail, At least up until December, stores saw more customers in 2012, and did more hiring. In November, the retail sector reported 53,000 new jobs more than a third of all the jobs created that month. That was up sharply from November 2011, when retailers added just 34,000 new jobs., Shoppers have been particularly eager to spend money at electronics outlets and clothing stores. They have had a little more money to spend, thanks to lower gasoline prices and tame inflation in general. Overall, consumer prices rose only about 2 percent in the past year., The National Retail Federation, a trade association, has predicted a 4.1 percent sales increase this holiday season higher than the 3.5 percent average annual forecast for the past decade. This is the most optimistic forecast NRF has released since the recession, Matthew Shay, the group's president, said in a statement.
A retail store at the CambridgeSide Galleria mall in Cambridge, Mass., advertises holiday sale, Monday, Dec. 24, 2012., A retail store at the CambridgeSide Galleria mall in Cambridge, Mass., advertises holiday sale, Monday, Dec. 24, 2012., On this Christmas Eve there's this not-so-cheery news from The Associated Press:, Christmas shoppers thronged malls and pounced on discounts but apparently spent less this year, their spirits dampened by concerns about the economy and the aftermath of shootings and storms., The wire service says that:, Marshal Cohen, chief research analyst at NPD Inc., a market research firm with a network of analysts at shopping centers nationwide, estimates customer traffic over the weekend was in line with the same time a year ago, but that shoppers seem to be spending less. 'There was this absence of joy for the holiday,' Cohen said. 'There was no Christmas spirit. There have been just too many distractions.' , Those distractions include the so-called fiscal cliff a combination of automatic tax hikes, spending cuts and expiring unemployment benefits that will start to kick in as 2013 dawns unless President Obama and congressional leaders come up with some alternatives very quickly., And on that point, the AP says, lawmakers are increasingly skeptical about a possible deal and some predict the best possibility would be a small-scale patch because time is running out before the year-end deadline. Sen. Joe Lieberman predicted Sunday: 'We're going to spend New Year's Eve here, I believe.' , This morning's related headlines include:, &mdash; Gloomy Predictions As Washington Approaches The 'Fiscal Cliff.' (Christian Science Monitor), &mdash; Lawmakers Say Time Short To Reach Deal On Fiscal Cliff. (Bloomberg News), &mdash; Cliff Would Strike Low Incomes Hard. (The Wall Street Journal), &mdash; Business Groups Grow Frustrated Over Impasse In 'Fiscal Cliff' Talks. (The Hill), &mdash; Europe's Financial Markets Flat On Fiscal Cliff Fears. (MarketWatch)
Defense Undersecretary for Policy Michele Flournoy talks with Marines Lt. Gen. John Paxton on Capitol Hill in 2010. Flournoy has since left her position to spend more time with her three children., Defense Undersecretary for Policy Michele Flournoy talks with Marines Lt. Gen. John Paxton on Capitol Hill in 2010. Flournoy has since left her position to spend more time with her three children., Among the candidates President Obama may nominate for the next defense secretary is Michele Flournoy, formerly the highest-ranking woman in the Pentagon., Flournoy is a mother of three, and in February, she stunned her colleagues when she stepped down from her job as undersecretary of defense for policy to spend more time with her children., It wasn't an easy decision, but it's a dilemma that many working mothers face. While some call for changes in workplace policy to make caring for families and working easier, others argue women ultimately have to make a choice., Choosing Family Over Career, When Flournoy was working at the Pentagon, she says her hours were long and intense. She would work starting at 7 a.m. for about 12 hours, pretty much non-stop. Then she would have maybe two hours with her family at home before being available to work again around 9 p.m., She did that for three years. During that time, both she and her husband were in senior government positions (her husband, W. Scott Gould, is deputy secretary of Veterans Affairs)., There was a point in time, when my older kids were reaching the teenage years, that they really needed more of a parent, she tells Guy Raz, host of weekends on All Things Considered., So after a number of long discussions with her husband, Flournoy says, they decided it was time for one of them to step out., It was an agonizing decision for Flournoy, in part because she didn't want to let down the younger women who looked to her to open doors for them. The reaction she actually received surprised her., Her decision resonated with women around the country and it prompted a new national discussion about whether mothers can reach the highest levels of government or corporate America as easily as men., Glass Ceilings Left Unbroken, Though many industries in this country are increasingly dominated by women, there is no evidence that things at the top are changing. Kay Hymowitz, a scholar with the Manhattan Institute, says only 4 percent of the CEOs at Fortune 500 companies are female. Why the disparity?, Hymowitz says it's children though we have to always make the caveat that yes, there is discrimination. But the major factor in the gap both the ... wage gap and the gap at the very top ... is due to children., Both the public and private sectors are adapting in some ways to change that, particularly by offering flextime. But at a certain point and this is particularly true at the top the competition is so keen to get ahead that if you have a young baby at home [and] you're a woman or, for that matter, a man who wants to be quite involved with raising that baby, it's just a matter of physics, she says. You cannot be doing both things., So women work fewer hours, take off more time for maternity leave and are more likely to work part time than men. Hymowitz says they seem to want it that way, too., The presumption that this is really what women want they want this absolute parity with men in the workplace it really remains to be proven, she says., Not Exactly A Choice, Karen Kornbluh spent three years looking for ways to close the gender gap as an ambassador to the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. She worries there's too much focus on the alpha females who could run companies or governments., Diversifying leadership is important, she says, but what I also want to pay attention to is the middle-class family, the lower-income family, where the mother doesn't even have the choice of stepping out., Choice is a funny word, though. Kornbluh says inequality in the workplace in this country is not about women of any socioeconomic status choosing family over work., I wouldn't call it a 'choice' in the classic sense, because I don't think they have a lot of options, she says., You're expected to give 100 percent on the home front and 100 percent at the work front and 100 percent to your friends and your community, she says, and you feel like a complete failure., Unrealistic Expectations, Before serving as ambassador, Kornbluh rose to deputy chief of staff at the Treasury. After the birth of her second child, she quit., We simply haven't yet adjusted to contemporary family life, she says, which often requires all adults to juggle work and home., We still have this idea in our head that the ideal worker is the breadwinner with no [domestic] responsibilities and the ideal parent is the homemaker with no workplace responsibilities, she says. And we haven't changed our expectations enough., Beyond flextime and health insurance, Kornbluh says, quality, affordable child care would make a significant impact, particularly for lower-income and single-parent families. That and economic growth. Lower wages have meant more hours for both parents and more time away from home., If we could get growth again but broadly shared growth, she says, that would make a huge difference., Having It All: It's Possible, When Flournoy stepped down from the Pentagon, a number of women thanked her for making it OK to have times in life to rebalance in favor of family. For Flournoy, that shift happens in waves. She believes it is possible to be a working mom at the highest levels of the workplace., I just think ... there's a sequencing, she says. I mean, I'm one who believes that you can have it all you just can't always have it at exactly the same time with equal intensity., My career has looked like a sine curve in terms of balancing and rebalancing, Flournoy adds. Different periods where I've had more intense career focus versus more of a family focus. That's not possible for everyone, she admits, as many women don't have the support they need to rebalance while staying competitive., At this point in her career, Flournoy says, either she or her husband still needs to be out of government service, for their teenagers., But I have certainly had a chance to recharge my batteries, and I am eager for public service in the future, she says. That said, it would be very hard to miss these very precious years where I have ... the last years with my teenagers at home.
August A. Busch (center) and his sons, Adolphus III (left) and August Jr., seal the first case of beer off the Anheuser-Busch bottling plant line in St. Louis on April 7, 1933, when the sale of low-alcohol beers and wines was once again legal. Prohibition didn't officially end until Dec. 5 of that year., The Rise and Fall of Anheuser-Busch and America's Kings of Beer, by William Knoedelseder, Hardcover, 396 pages | purchase, More on this book:, William Knoedelseder spent 12 years as an investigative reporter at the Los Angeles Times. He lives in Woodland Hills, Calif., William Knoedelseder spent 12 years as an investigative reporter at the Los Angeles Times. He lives in Woodland Hills, Calif., For nearly 150 years the world-renowned beer manufacturer Anheuser-Busch was a family company. It was passed from father to son for five generations. A couple drops of Budweiser were put onto the tongue of each first-born son before he even tasted his mother's milk. That trademark brew, Budweiser, is known to the world as the King of Beers, and the Busch family wasn't too far from American royalty., William Knoedelseder, the author of Bitter Brew: The Rise and Fall of Anheuser-Busch and America's King of Beer, spoke with NPR's Guy Raz about the family and their company. , The story begins in xad when a young man, Adolphus Busch, came to St. Louis from Germany. With his meager inheritance he was one of 22 children he bought a brewery supply company. Making beer was something that he knew how to do, and could do well., Ebert Anheuser, on the other hand, couldn't. He was one of Busch's buyers and was a wealthy soap manufacturer who'd come into owning a failing brewery. The Bavarian Brewing Co. produced such horribly tasting beer that people would spit it back across the bar at bartenders, Knoedelseder says., Eventually Busch took over the company, changed the recipe, changed the name, and Anheuser-Busch was born., Busch took that failure of a local brewery and turned it into a national brand of beer. He was vertically integrated before there was a name for it, Knoedelseder says. Busch was the first person to pasteurize beer so that it would stay fresh on cross-country trips. He also owned the company that built the railroad cars that transported his beer. He owned the company that made his bottles. He even owned a coal mine that fired his plant., The brand took off. Beer became the national drink, and Anheuser-Busch was reeling in the profits, They were selling a million barrels a year, which was just unthinkable back then, says Knoedelseder., Soon, though, prohibition, not alcohol, was on the lips of Americans. Busch launched pre-prohibition ad campaigns to try to curb the movement. Taglines read, Budweiser Spells Temperance. He claimed the beer was a light, happy beverage., When meeting the president at a political function, Busch launched into a 30-minute lecture about the dangers of the impending prohibition. He would stop at nothing, but his worst nightmare was upon him. His only product was now illegal to sell in the United States., His son, August Anheuser-Busch, or August A., floated the company through prohibition by selling the raw ingredients instead of the full product. It wasn't illegal to sell the ingredients, it was illegal to assemble them, Knoedelseder explains. Their yeast profits saved the company. That was the cash engine that was able to keep the company open., Prohibition wiped out most of Anhesuser-Busch's competition, but as Knoedelseder points out, August A. was able to keep 2,000 people working and they were poised to forge ahead as the leading American manufacturer of beer now legal!, For two more generations, ambitious Busch sons pushed the company to international beer power, but it wasn't without trial. The next 75 years were mired in family struggles for power, unexpected deaths, drug addiction, alcoholism and more., In 2008 Anheuser-Busch was a $19-billion-a-year Fortune 500 company and still operating as a family business. August IV, the great-great-grandson of Aldolphus, and then-CEO, showed up to speak at a beer industry convention but he couldn't seem to get a word out. He's stoned, he's loaded, he cannot deliver the speech, Knoedelser says. Just a few weeks later, it all came crashing down., InBev, a company that had not existed four years before, moved in for a hostile takeover, and with that, the reign of the Busch family was over., Read an excerpt of Bitter Brew
If there's one common language that some recent immigrants in Dayton, Ohio, seem to share, it's soccer., The first Dayton World Soccer Games kicked off earlier this year, an initiative hosted by the city to welcome an influx of immigrants. On the field, a rainbow of brightly colored jerseys represented nearly 20 of the different immigrant communities in the city., I've been really surprised to see that there's a lot of soccer going on in Dayton, says Adolphe Bizwinayo, who left Rwanda as a refugee., Adolphe Bizwinayo left Rwanda as a refugee and says his new city, Dayton, Ohio, helped him transition to American life with initiatives like the Dayton World Soccer Games., Adolphe Bizwinayo left Rwanda as a refugee and says his new city, Dayton, Ohio, helped him transition to American life with initiatives like the Dayton World Soccer Games., The sport, he says, has been instrumental in his transition to the unfamiliar city., It just brings this joy, like we are home ... like how we used to play soccer back at home when we would play for hours and hours, Bizwinayo says., That kind of response is exactly why the city launched Welcome Dayton last year a strategy to help immigrants ease into American life. City Manager Tim Riordan credits two reasons for the adopted framework: It was the right thing to do, he says, and immigrants were needed to help restore the battered city's economy., I saw immigrants doing things in the neighborhoods, Riordan says. They were buying really inexpensive houses and fixing them up. I heard stories from hardware owners where the immigrants would come and buy one window at a time to fix up their house as they got money., An Investment In The Community, Riordan says changing Dayton's culture is an investment in the city. One section of the city, for example, is now entirely designated as an immigrant business zone, and police can check immigration statuses only when suspicious of a serious crime., Audrey Singer, a senior fellow at the Brookings Metropolitan Policy Program, says the relationship between cities and immigrants is certainly evolving., What's good about the Dayton program is the way that leaders in those communities talk about immigrants and talk about them as a positive force and contributing, she says., In fact, a Brookings study finds that immigrants are 30 percent more likely to form new businesses than U.S.-born citizens, which is good news for a city like Dayton, which has been bleeding jobs and population for decades., Legal Immigrants, That Is, Not everyone, however, is a fan of the city's new approach. Steve Salvi runs the Cleveland-based Ohio Jobs and Justice PAC, a group focused on illegal immigration. He says officials are relying on a naive myth that immigrants will be the saviors of Dayton., I think what the city needs to do is focus on helping native residents and make the city a place where people want to come and start a business if they're immigrants or native-born, Salvi says., One of his largest concerns is that Dayton could become a sanctuary city, a place harboring illegal immigrants., City Manager Riordan, however, maintains that the term immigrant is not synonymous with illegal. Frankly, the good people of Dayton didn't have that kind of attitude, he says. It was the people from outside of Dayton. I got emails from outside Wyoming and Montana telling us what to do, and I was like, 'Eh, that's not your business.' , The real thrust of the plan focuses on legal immigrants, Riordan adds. For instance, the city wants to help people like Francis Matias, who worked hard to get his Puerto Rican restaurant, Antojitos, off the ground., In other states, it's harder. They're following immigrants and they're treated like criminals. Here, it's great, Matias says in his kitchen., Other cities, however, are now falling into line with Dayton. Tucson, Ariz., and Salt Lake City, for example, are among those also making it official policy to welcome immigrants and help them feel at home.
Retailers are finding that shoplifting at self-serve checkout lines is surprisingly common., Retailers are finding that shoplifting at self-serve checkout lines is surprisingly common., With Christmas on Tuesday, the last-minute holiday shopping this weekend should make for some of the biggest spending all year. Those busy stores are also going to be on the lookout for shoplifters, especially in self-checkout lanes, where it is a big problem., At a supermarket in Sedalia, Mo., people are stocking up for their traditional holiday dinners. Employees help customers at the store's four self-service lanes, but every so often they catch items that customers did not scan., With a smile and a helping hand, the employees are there to make sure all of a customer's items get scanned and paid for., That is what we call aggressive hospitality, says Doug Haworth, who is in charge of loss prevention at Wood's Supermarkets. He says the aggressive hospitality is a tactic to reduce theft., At self-checkout, if the intent is to leave the store without paying for anything, what we've seen is they usually make it worth their while, he says., This video provided by StopLift shows customers appearing to skip scanning several items in a self-checkout line., That's costing stores big time. Richard Hollinger, who studies theft for the National Retail Federation, says many companies are removing their self-checkout lanes, claiming customers don't like them. In reality, he says, they're just losing too much money., They've done the cost-benefit analysis, and there were some negatives that they never really anticipated, Hollinger says., One reason is that at self-checkout, wannabe shoplifters have a great excuse., If I didn't scan everything, I can say, 'Oh, I couldn't tell what was going on, it was confusing, it was beeping at me,' says Malay Kundu, the CEO of StopLift, a Massachusetts company that uses computerized video analysis to flag shoplifting., The company's videos show people scanning only some items and putting others directly into the bag, ringing up pricey produce at the price of bananas or scanning cheap items and putting more expensive ones on the weight sensor., Amazingly, in one video, a shoplifter calls over the attendant after having trouble getting her coupons accepted., This is a pretty common thing, he says, because you might as well get a discount on the few things you paid for., Right now StopLift's service only tells stores after the fact which transactions to follow up on, but Kundu is testing a system that would alert employees in real time., For now, though, many retailers are holding off or staffing up with aggressive hospitality. So when that self-checkout attendant is super-nice to you this weekend, she may just be making sure that you're not being super-naughty.
Mike Score, president of Hantz Farms, shows off a small-scare version of what Hantz Woodlands will look like., Mike Score, president of Hantz Farms, shows off a small-scare version of what Hantz Woodlands will look like., An entrepreneur says he's got a plan to curb urban blight in parts of Detroit. He's buying up acre after acre of abandoned lots and planting thousands of trees. But where backers of the plan see a visionary proposal, critics see a land grab., Entrepreneur and Detroiter John Hantz, owner of Hantz Farms and the tree-planting effort called Hantz Woodlands, wants to plant at least 15,000 trees on about 140 acres. Hantz promises to clear out all the trash and keep the grass cut, things the city cannot afford to do now., At a demonstration area for the project, Mike Score of Hantz Farms shows off the progress made to transform the vegetation. It's basically a small-scare version of what Hantz Woodlands will look like., The brush is gone from alongside the road. There are still some houses, but the vacant space that used to be covered with tall vegetation and brush and garbage is clean, Score says., It's cleaned up and filled with neat rows of small hardwood trees oaks and sugar maples., The company is paying $300 for each lot. And that price tag has raised some eyebrows. Some residents can see only a speculator getting a sweetheart deal from a city desperate for money and development ideas., If the city is going to give away land at bake sale prices, give it to the people first, says Matthew Greenia, one of dozens of people who spoke out against the project at a public hearing earlier this month. He and others say the city should have put the land into a public trust instead., Right now there's so much land that it's possible to do that, too, says Margaret Dewar, an urban-planning professor at the University of Michigan. Dewar says sure, some of Detroit's vacant land can be put into public trust for residents or community groups. But she says there aren't enough groups to handle the massive amount of vacant land here., Score says that while thousands of trees won't reverse the fortunes of this hardscrabble neighborhood, he hopes it will stabilize things., And if nothing gets done, if everything in the city looks like the area across the street where the blighted houses are located, the people who live here will want to leave, but nobody will buy their houses and they'll feel trapped, he says., The project will buy 1,500 city lots. That still leaves more than 58,000 parcels the city owns but can't afford to manage. That means plenty more opportunities for unorthodox ideas about what to do with Detroit's most abundant resource.
Shoppers at a K-B Toy store in northern Virginia last month., Shoppers at a K-B Toy store in northern Virginia last month., There are two positive economic signals to pass along this morning:, &mdash; The Census Bureau says orders for durable goods rose 0.7 percent in November from October. That follows a 1.1 percent rise in October from September and is the sixth increase in the past seven months., Durable goods are such things as machinery that are supposed to last for three years or longer. Bloomberg News says this morning's report is a sign that U.S. companies are planning to expand next year as they look beyond the tax increases and spending cuts slated to take effect., &mdash; Consumer spending rose 0.4 percent in November from October, the Bureau of Economic Analysis says, and Americans' personal incomes rose 0.6 percent. The Associated Press notes that spending rebounded after being pulled down 0.1 percent in October. That dip was mostly attributed to the disruptions caused by Superstorm Sandy across New Jersey, downstate New York and surrounding regions., The spending figure is seasonally adjusted, meaning that it should account for the expected increase due to holiday shopping.
House Speaker John Boehner pauses during a news conference Thursday. House GOP leaders abruptly canceled a vote on his measure after they failed to round up enough votes for it to pass., House Speaker John Boehner pauses during a news conference Thursday. House GOP leaders abruptly canceled a vote on his measure after they failed to round up enough votes for it to pass., House Speaker John Boehner was dealt a major defeat Thursday night. After spending most of the week trying to round up votes for his Plan B to extend tax cuts for virtually everyone, he pulled the measure without a vote and sent the House home for Christmas. The clock keeps ticking toward the end of the year, when automatic tax increases and spending cuts are set to hit., Early Thursday, Boehner expressed confidence not only that his bill would pass but that the Democratic-controlled Senate would feel so much pressure, it would be forced to consider it, too., I am not convinced at all that when the bill passes the House today that it will die in the Senate, Boehner said early Thursday., It turns out he was wrong very wrong. And the problem was his fellow Republicans. Boehner's bill would have extended tax cuts for income up to a million dollars. But it also would have raised taxes on those who make more than that., That made some conservatives, like Rep. Mick Mulvaney of South Carolina, uncomfortable., I want to protect everybody, Mulvaney said. I think everybody pays too much in taxes so I am looking for some way to protect everybody., Around the time the bill should have been up for a vote, Boehner gathered his conference in the basement of the Capitol and told them he wouldn't bring it up. His whip team had counted the votes, and they didn't have enough., He couldn't get the votes for this proposal, said Steve LaTourette, a retiring representative from Ohio. At the end of the day, you can't make people vote., Many of the unconvinced were freshmen elected in the Tea Party wave of 2010., Rep. Tim Huelskamp of Kansas, the most vocal of the bunch, said the speaker was asking his members to take a vote that violated conservative principles. The conservatives rebelled., This is not Republican material, said Huelskamp. I think that's probably why they wisely pulled the plug and said, 'OK, let's regroup.' But regroup and reassess you know, what exactly do Republicans stand for? and pushing things that we can pull together on instead of divide ourselves on., The speaker is stuck, said LaTourette. He can only play with the cards he's dealt. The voters have populated our conference with this set of representatives, and he does his best to work with them. But sometimes your best isn't good enough in the face of some people that just don't want to find common ground., Jack Pitney, a professor of politics at California's Claremont McKenna College, feels for Boehner., To quote the great philosopher John Belushi in Animal House, my advice to the speaker: 'start drinking heavily,' he said., Pitney can't figure out why the speaker would make such a public push if he didn't have the votes lined up to begin with., If he brings a proposal to the president, the president's going to say, 'Look John, how do I know you're going to get the support of the members of your conference?' That's an extremely weak hand to be presenting when you're dealing with the president. Where this ends up, I don't know, Pitney said., To those on the inside, the end game isn't any clearer., California Rep. Buck McKeon, a Boehner ally, walked out of the conference meeting discouraged, saying, I don't know how we can get out of this mess., McKeon added that the speaker might not get any credit for it, but Boehner wants to do what is right. And he thinks with divided government we should be able to do big things, and we can't do anything, and this is really, really sad, McKeon said., The White House issued a statement late Thursday night saying the president will work with Congress and hopes to find a bipartisan solution quickly., There's not much time left. Congress doesn't plan to return to Washington until two days after Christmas.
Innkeepers are combating old stereotypes about bed and breakfasts. The Richardson Room at the Round Barn Farm in Waitsfield, Vt., was renovated this year to reflect more more modern tastes., Innkeepers are combating old stereotypes about bed and breakfasts. The Richardson Room at the Round Barn Farm in Waitsfield, Vt., was renovated this year to reflect more more modern tastes., There is a war going on. The enemy is an innocuous little piece of ornamental fabric., When the Professional Association of Innkeepers launched the Death to Doilies Campaign this year, the approach was tongue-in-cheek, but the message of change was serious: The doily has had the run of bed and breakfasts for too long., What was really interesting for me was to watch the reaction of the industry as a whole. Some of them loved it. Some of them did not love it, says Janice Hurley, who manages a Vermont inn and speaks to industry groups., The Abbott Room at the Round Barn Farm got a makeover in 2009., The Abbott Room at the Round Barn Farm got a makeover in 2009., Twenty-First Century Tastes, In Vermont, B&B; owners can be a tradition-bound bunch and for good reason. Their inns are often 19th century farmhouses., Recently, Hurley told a gathering of the state's innkeepers that their future depends on attracting new and younger guests who have 21st century tastes and demands., What we're going to talk about is who are the Gen X and the Gen Y travelers and how can we avoid being left behind, Hurley said., Hurley said a good website is key to marketing to customers who do everything online, and it can dispel stereotypes about B&amp;Bs.;, But first, owners should make sure their inns don't fit those stereotypes. Judging by a show of hands, private bathrooms are the norm these days at Vermont inns, but there's more to be done: more power outlets, less wallpaper and new color schemes are all part of appealing to younger guests. If doilies are out, throw pillows may not be far behind., The last thing I want to do is unmake the bed to get into the bed, Hurley said. So if I walk into a room and there's 15 pillows, I'm, like, 'Ugh!' , Hurley said it's not necessary to remake every room, and the changes should be consistent with the character of a place., The Value Of Tradition, The innkeepers met at an upscale B&B;, where owner Anne Marie DeFreest showed off a recently remodeled room where ornate touches and busy wallpaper were replaced with soft colors and an uncluttered, open look. The room and the bathroom are spacious., A lot of our Gen X, Gen Y clientele are living in smaller apartments in cities, so to come up with a room that has more space to just 'be' is important, DeFreest said., DeFreest said her inn also features locally produced food because that's important to younger travelers., Don Huber, one of the innkeepers at the meeting, said he's embracing the decor changes, to get out of the mode of, 'Oh, you're staying at grandmother's house.' , But not everyone is keen on abandoning the old B&B; image., Our inn is small. We have seven rooms. It's kind of like going to grandma's house, said Susan Spencer, who has been in business with her husband for 35 years., Their inn, just down the road, is tidy and cozy and filled with antiques and handmade braided rugs and quilts. Even the Reader's Digests are from the 1970s., Vermont B&B; owners say the fact that every inn has its own unique feel is a selling point that can help attract a new generation of guests looking for something different.
Instagram backed down from a planned policy change that appeared to clear the way for the mobile photo sharing service to sell pictures without compensation, after users cried foul., Instagram backed down from a planned policy change that appeared to clear the way for the mobile photo sharing service to sell pictures without compensation, after users cried foul., Instagram is switching back to older terms of service relating to advertising after online outrage over changes earlier this week., As we reported Tuesday, one of the top concerns expressed by users was whether their photos could be used in advertisements without their permission., The company released updates to its privacy policy and terms of service Monday, and by Tuesday it had posted a statement in its blog trying to address the concerns that arose. Legal documents are easy to misinterpret, it said. It also added:, Our intention in updating the terms was to communicate that we'd like to experiment with innovative advertising that feels appropriate on Instagram. Instead it was interpreted by many that we were going to sell your photos to others without any compensation. This is not true and it is our mistake that this language is confusing., But Thursday the company had removed the new section on advertising completely, it announced in a statement posted by Instagram co-founder Kevin Systrom. Systrom apologizes for the company's failure to communicate our intentions clearly and says that the feedback it received prompted Instagram to go back to its original language. He says:, Going forward, rather than obtain permission from you to introduce possible advertising products we have not yet developed, we are going to take the time to complete our plans, and then come back to our users and explain how we would like for our advertising business to work., He also reiterated that Instagram has no intention of selling users' photos, and we never did. We don't own your photos you do., The statement says the updated terms will take effect Jan. 19.
AR-15-style rifles are offered for sale at a sporting goods store in Tinley Park, Ill., Leaders of the National Rifle Association plan to break their weeklong silence Friday and make their first public comments on the mass shootings at Sandy Hook Elementary in Newtown, Conn., They say they will be speaking for the NRA's 4 million members. But they will also be speaking for the gun industry, which has close financial ties to the association., The NRA and the gun industry are reeling after last week's massacre. The primary weapon used an AR-15-style rifle is one of the most popular guns in America., The National Shooting Sports Foundation, the trade association of the firearms industry, says those who have AR-15s are among the most passionate gun owners., Just recently, the foundation put out a video touting the AR-15 as probably one of the most customizable rifles there is today. A gunsmith showed how to add a muzzle flash hider, various sights and other accessories things the gun is designed to accept easily., And that captures the strength and possibly the weakness of the industry and the NRA., What we're seeing is that the industry is trying to think of one new thing to sell to gun owners, says Josh Sugarmann, head of the Violence Policy Center, a group seeking tighter gun laws., Studies show the American gun culture faces long-term problems: too many older white guys; dwindling land for hunting, as suburbs encroach; and kids who pick up video games rather than BB guns., Sugarmann says industry leaders see the problem. They've recognized that the traditional market traditional hunting rifles and shotguns is saturated. So there's an ever-shrinking market that's buying more and more lethal weapons, he says., Weapons like the AR-15 a civilian version of the standard military rifle. The industry-preferred term is modern sporting rifle., A survey by the Shooting Sports Foundation found that nearly two-thirds of AR-15 owners own more than one., The NRA and the foundation are trying to expand the market of gun enthusiasts as with a foundation promo for a program called First Shots. If you've never fired a gun before, here's your chance. Your local shooting range wants to give you a shot, the promo says. You're invited to a free seminar developed by the National Shooting Sports Foundation., But those demographic woes are for the long term., Nima Samadi, an industry analyst at IBISWorld, has a short-term picture. He says that compared with the military and law enforcement segments of the gun industry, the consumer segment has seen a pretty aggressive growth, particularly over the past five years., One reason: fear of crime. The crime rate has been steadily declining, but it still helps explain the strength in handgun sales., The other reason much more powerful is the fear that if you don't buy that AR-15 now, the Obama administration won't let you buy it later., By far, that's the largest driver for the growth, Samadi says., Wayne LaPierre, executive vice president of the NRA, appeared on Glenn Beck's TV station earlier this month, before Sandy Hook., I mean, the strongest defense of the Second Amendment is the marketplace, he said. And there's no clearer picture about how average American citizens feel about their Second Amendment rights than lines at gun stores all over the country right now because they fear the Obama administration's second term is coming after their freedom., All of this has the effect of bringing the quarter-billion-dollar-a-year NRA and the $12 billion-a-year gun industry closer together., Sturm Ruger, known especially for its handguns, had a yearlong promotion in which it gave the NRA a dollar for each gun sold. The total exceeded $1.2 million., Beretta USA gave $1 million to support Second Amendment lawsuits., And the CEO of Cabela's, the big-box chain that sells sports and outdoors gear, gave the NRA $1 million cash. He was inducted into the association's Golden Ring of Freedom for top donors., It's much too early to tell how the Connecticut massacre will affect things either financially or legislatively. But right now, gun sales are spiking. Once again, it's the fear of new gun control laws that's moving weapons off the shelves.
San Francisco: A sold sign in front of a home earlier this year., San Francisco: A sold sign in front of a home earlier this year., There was a 5.9 percent rise in sales of previously owned homes in November from October, the National Association of Realtors says., At their 5.04 million annual rate, sales were the highest since November 2009., Momentum continues to build, NAR chief economist Lawrence Yun says in the organization's report., As Reuters notes, the U.S. housing market tanked on the eve of the 2007-09 recession and has yet to fully recover, but steady job creation has helped the housing sector this year, when it is expected to add to economic growth for the first time since 2005., Earlier today, there was word that third-quarter economic growth has been revised upward again.
The floor of the New York Stock Exchange., The floor of the New York Stock Exchange., The New York Stock Exchange will be acquired by IntercontinentalExchange of Atlanta in a deal valued at about $8.2 billion, the two rivals confirmed Thursday morning., In matching press releases, they say the sale combines two leading exchange groups to create a premier global exchange operator diversified across markets including agricultural and energy commodities, credit derivatives, equities and equity derivatives, foreign exchange and interest rates., The Wall Street Journal notes that the deal would end more than two centuries of independence for the New York Stock Exchange, one of Wall Street's most enduring symbols of American capitalism., And, it adds:, Exchanges have turned in recent years to mergers to help offset intense competition and the relentless decline in trading commissions they pocket from brokers and other market participants. Yet the deal-making appeared to reach its limit last year, when several large cross-border mergers failed amid regulators' concerns. ..., A combination of ICE and NYSE Euronext would likely raise fewer regulatory concerns because the two exchange groups don't have as much direct overlap in the markets they run. ICE's main business lies in energy futures trading, a sector where NYSE Euronext has made few inroads., According to Bloomberg News:, Mergng NYSE Euronext, which owns the biggest exchanges by value of listings in the U.S., France and the Netherlands, with the second-largest futures market underscores both the growing importance of derivatives and the diminishing influence of the 220-year-old NYSE. The Big Board, once the benchmark for global free markets, has seen its share of trading in stocks listed on the exchange decline to 21 percent from 82 percent., Reuters writes that analysts said the deal will give Atlanta-based ICE a strategic boost with control of Liffe, Europe's second-largest derivatives market, helping it compete against U.S.-based CME Group Inc, owner of the Chicago Board of Trade.
The best estimate of how quickly the economy was growing in the third quarter has been revised upward again a sign that as summer turned into fall things were better than first thought., The Bureau of Economic Analysis now says gross domestic product grew at a 3.1 percent annual rate from the end of June through September. That's up from the 2.7 percent estimate BEA released last month, and well above its initial report issued in October that put the growth rate at 2 percent. Spending by consumers and governments has been greater than previously estimated., Not all the morning's economic news is that positive, though. The Employment and Training says there were 361,000 first-time claims for unemployment insurance last week up 17,000 from the week before., And there's this cautionary note from Bloomberg News about the GDP report:, The world's largest economy will be hard-pressed to maintain that pace of growth this quarter as global demand cools and companies limit spending and hiring ahead of looming tax increases and spending cuts. While a stronger housing market will provide some cushion, the Federal Reserve is pursuing record stimulus aimed at driving bigger gains for the expansion.
High school student Jon Ledbetter designs his own NikeiD sneakers. Ledbetter can post his designs on Nike's website, where other shoppers can also order them., High school student Jon Ledbetter designs his own NikeiD sneakers. Ledbetter can post his designs on Nike's website, where other shoppers can also order them., It wasn't long ago that all consumers went to retail stores to buy things. These days, of course, you can get just about anything online. Some companies are now taking that shopping experience to the next level, allowing customers to design almost anything individually from a trench coat to a batch of M&M;'s., Lindsay Stewart, a senior at Holy Innocents' Episcopal School in Atlanta, is a Converse fan and an avid Converse custom designer. Converse, like Nike, offers sneakers that customers can customize, mixing colors and patterns to bring their ideas to life., You can do half of the shoe stars and [the] other half is still simply white, Stewart says, showing off her design. You can incorporate the color you specifically want so it can easily match your outfits., Walking Advertisements, Stewart has designed three pairs this year: one with a star pattern, another for the Fourth of July and a neon mix she made for a party., Students really love showing off, and kids love showing off who they are, Stewart says. And ... me spreading the word about how I designed these shoes led to all my friends wanting to design their own., That's just what retailers are hoping for getting customers involved and having them tell others about their experience., The only drawback may be the cost. These custom-designed shoes are about 20 to 25 percent more expensive, depending on the design., Customization started with computers more than a decade ago. Now, you can create your own T-shirts, jeans and custom-blend cosmetics., Some luxury brands are getting involved, too. On the Burberry Bespoke website, it's hard not to be seduced by the elegant tune playing under close-ups of hand-sewn fabric and old-world charm. Burberry allows customers to create their own trench coats, but they start at more than $2,000 and no returns are allowed., And at Prada and Louis Vuitton, you can make your own handbags and shoes with limited options to preserve their high-end designer look., M&M;'s lets customers create their own mix by choosing colors and even adding personalized photos and messages., M&M;'s lets customers create their own mix by choosing colors and even adding personalized photos and messages., Building Brand Loyalty, It really helps build a relationship with their customers, says Ann Marie Fiore, a professor of apparel at Iowa State University. You're always looking at building that brand loyalty., Fiore says companies face extra upfront costs in setting up the customization process. On the other hand, they save on product development costs because consumers are doing that for them and they don't have to store big inventories., Fiore says one of the biggest growth areas is food. A site called Chocomize, for example, lets you create your own gourmet chocolate bars by adding fruits, nuts and even sugared rose petals., I can see this as being something that's really attractive, where people feel more confident about their choices, Fiore says. And there's not so much risk. So you're not paying $425 for a pair of shoes, you're paying $8 for a candy bar., Fiore predicts that all means customization will only continue to grow for a variety of products., M&M;'s is already doing it. You can choose your own colors, add designs and even have your own photo printed on the tiny candies., I ordered my own Christmas-colored mix with a snowman print, chose expedited shipping and had my package two days later. They're exactly what I ordered, but the cost is four times higher than if I'd bought traditional M&M;'s at a store. And shipping is extra, too., Creating Your 'Perfect Expression', Dan Michael, research and development director for Mars Retail Group, which makes M&M;'s, says it took the company about three years to develop its customization process. He says the company gets about half a million orders a year, with weddings and birthdays as the biggest draw., The candy certainly serves as ... a blank canvas for our customers to create their perfect expression, Michael says., Back at Holy Innocents' High School, student Jon Ledbetter says personalizing clothes and shoes is fun for him and for lots of young people. He plays basketball and has designed about a dozen pairs of NikeiD sneakers, including one featuring the school's crimson and gold colors., People are like, 'Where did you get those from, where did you get those from?' I made 'em so you can't get them anywhere else, Ledbetter says and laughs. They're mine. They're my creation., Ledbetter can post the shoes he made on Nike's website, where others can comment or even order his design., Two German professors have documented some 500 international mass-customization sites and the number is growing.
There are 760 million Christian children in the world, according to the Pew Research Center. Suppose Santa delivers one gift to each child. What kind of delivery workforce would Santa need?, We couldn't get an interview with Santa. But we did get Paul Tronsor from FedEx and Mike Mangeot from UPS. They helped us go through the numbers., Here are just a few of the positions Santa would need to fill to pull off Christmas. (Note: For the complete list, see the graphic at the bottom.), * 46 international distribution centers, to allow Santa to reload as he crosses the globe. That means 400,000 workers for loading presents onto Santa's sleigh., * 60,000 workers to develop optimized flight plans and communicate with the FAA, secure flyover rights, etc., * 7,000 people monitoring demand and tweaking his route in real time., * 100 meteorologists to make sure Santa doesn't fly into a blizzard., * 40,000 people to help Santa clear customs., To give you a sense of how big that team is, that's 40 times the number of employees at FedEx:, Source: FedEx, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo and Chana Joffe-Walt/NPR, Mike from UPS can think through all those teams and all those workers, but there's still something that's a mystery for him: the sleigh. Not only does it have to move fast enough to deliver 9,000 presents a second, but estimating conservatively that each present weighs about a pound, Mike says it would have to haul 760 million pounds of cargo. Which would take nearly three hundred 747 planes to haul. Or perhaps just nine reindeer., This is what the whole workforce looks like:, Source: UPS, FedEx, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo and Chana Joffe-Walt / NPR
General Motors is buying back stock from the U.S. government., In a statement early this morning, the Treasury Department says it's going to exit its investment in General Motors. The federal government holds just over 500 million shares of GM stock., The automaker will buy 200 million of those shares, and the government will dispose of the rest in an orderly fashion over the next year and a half, depending on market conditions., General Motors sounds relieved. In a statement, CEO Dan Akerson says this ends the idea among customers that the government owns GM. But he is thankful for the bailout: We come to work every day grateful that taxpayers from the US and Canada stepped forward to rescue our industry, and determined to show this extraordinary help was worth it., Each of the 200 million shares will cost GM $27.50, or about $5.5 million dollars in all. The remaining 300.1 million shares will be sold off by the federal government within 12 to 15 months, but the amount, method and time of the sales will depend on several factors the government doesn't discuss in its statement. Neither is the expected sale price., Treasury says it invested just under $50 billion dollars in GM to stabilize the automaker in 2008 and 2009, starting during the Bush Administration, and expanding during the Obama Administration. GM wasn't the the only bailout beneficiary - so did Chrysler, and financial institutions Citigroup and AIG.Here's the Treasury Department's link to its most recent update on the Troubled Asset Relief Program, or TARP. Last week, the agency says it sold off its last common stock shares of AIG., As for jobs, the government believes the TARP program saved 1 million of them in the auto industry. GM says since the rescue, it's created or retained more than 20,000 jobs.
The logo of Swiss banking giant UBS in Zurich, Switzerland., The logo of Swiss banking giant UBS in Zurich, Switzerland., Swiss banking giant UBS AG has agreed to pay $1.5 billion in fines to regulators in the U.S., Britain and Switzerland for its part in a scheme to manipulate the London interbank offered rate (LIBOR), which is used to set rates on contracts around the world., The bank confirmed the news in a statement. As The Associated Press reports, UBS is the second bank, after Britain's Barclays PLC, to settle over the rate-rigging scandal. Barclays is paying $450 million in fines., The AP adds that:, In accepting the fines, UBS said some of its employees tried to rig the LIBOR rate in several currencies, but that its Japan unit, where much of the manipulation took place, entered a plea to one count of wire fraud in an agreement with the U.S. Justice Department., UBS said some of its personnel had 'engaged in efforts to manipulate submissions for certain benchmark rates to benefit trading positions' and that some employees had 'colluded with employees at other banks and cash brokers to influence certain benchmark rates to benefit their trading positions.', UBS added that 'inappropriate directions' had been submitted that were 'in part motivated by a desire to avoid unfair and negative market and media perceptions during the financial crisis.' , The Wall Street Journal writes that authorities on Wednesday painted a picture of 'routine and widespread' attempts by UBS employees to rig Libor and the euro interbank offered rate, or Euribor. The U.K. Financial Services Authority said it had identified more than 2,000 such attempts between 2005 and 2010 with the participation or awareness of at least 45 UBS traders and executives. Adding to the severity of the allegations, the FSA said UBS engaged in collusive efforts with other financial institutions to rig the benchmarks., The Journal also reports that:, UBS acknowledged the regulators' findings. 'We are disappointed to discover what happened,' UBS Chief Executive Sergio Ermotti said in an interview. 'We are taking responsibility for what happened.' , Earlier this year, Planet Money wrote about the real victims in the LIBOR scandal.
Rifles are displayed for sale at a gun shop in Aurora, Colo., in July. Gun makers are feeling isolated by changing public attitudes., Rifles are displayed for sale at a gun shop in Aurora, Colo., in July. Gun makers are feeling isolated by changing public attitudes., It's a nervous time for companies that make and sell guns., On Tuesday, Cerberus Capital Management, a private equity firm, announced it was selling its stake in Freedom Group, maker of the American Bushmaster AR-15 rifle, which was used in the Newtown killings last Friday, along with other brands such as Remington., It is apparent that the Sandy Hook tragedy was a watershed event that has raised the national debate on gun control to an unprecedented level, Cerberus said in a statement., Also on Tuesday, Dick's Sporting Goods announced it will stop selling the Bushmaster, along with other modern rifles, out of respect for the victims and their families, according to a corporate statement., On Monday, Wal-Mart removed from its website a listing for a similar Bushmaster rifle, although it was still available in its stores., None of these companies want to be associated with this tragic event, says Brayden King, a professor of management and organizations at Northwestern University. By taking action now, they're showing they're aware of the damage that's been done., Corporate CEOs themselves may be reacting like other individuals, with sympathy, regret and grief, King says. But he also notes that investors are uncertain about the prospects for new gun regulations., The stock prices of major gun manufacturers such as Smith &amp; Wesson and Sturm Ruger &amp; Co., whose products were not involved in Friday's shootings, have dropped sharply in recent days., This could be one of those cases where we might really see some change as a result of this event, says Lawrence Glickman, author of Buying Power: A History of Consumer Activism in America. This seems to be some kind of tipping point where people who were uncomfortable but passive about the [gun] issue seem ready to take some kind of stand., Investor Concern, Investors have to worry not just about the possibility of a renewed push for gun-control legislation, but lasting changes in societal attitudes, says Larry Chavis, a University of North Carolina economist., Parents may have heightened concerns about gun safety for a long time, while individuals who might have casually been interested in guns as a potential hobby may be changing their minds., But a more immediate question may be whether investors want to be associated with lethal weapons. California Treasurer Bill Lockyer on Monday asked staff to begin reviewing the state's portfolio and called publicly on California's massive pension funds to divest from companies that produce guns that aren't legally available in the state., The California State Teachers' Retirement System has a $751.4 million stake in Cerberus., The tragic and devastating acts that took place Dec. 14 at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Connecticut have prompted many in this country to call for change: To determine what we can do differently to help ensure the unthinkable never happens again, the state teachers pension fund said in a statement Tuesday. In our case, CalSTRS investment staff immediately began reviewing our investments in private equity funds managed by Cerberus Capital Management., Brand Damage By Association, It's not just investors who have to worry about their association with gun makers it's retailers as well., No words can express the level of grief we all feel for the families of the Sandy Hook students, teachers and the Newtown community, Wal-Mart said in a statement. We remain dedicated to the safe and responsible sale of firearms in areas of the country where they are sold. We understand that the country will be engaged in a broad discussion of these issues over the next several months., It's their broader consumer base that Wal-Mart and Dick's are worried about, Chavis says. They are big gun sellers, but guns aren't at the heart of their businesses., It's partly a branding issue, says Glickman, who chairs the history department at the University of South Carolina. They do not want to be associated with this in any way., Major retail outlets have to worry about people who might come to their stores to buy diapers, electronics and ping-pong tables but are now skittish about guns over the long term, as well as the current Christmas shopping season., Allison Young, a 52-year-old homemaker in Manassas, Va., said she was horrified when she came across the gun section at a Wal-Mart and her son asked if they were real or toys., She no longer goes there. That's the reason I don't shop at Wal-Mart, she says. A family store that sells guns., Retailers would be wise to worry that that kind of attitude could turn into a broader backlash, Chavis says., You definitely wouldn't want to send a circular out advertising guns if you're Wal-Mart, certainly not in the next few weeks or months, he says., Boycotts Unlikely, There's been a long history of consumer boycotts launched against gun makers in this country. Smith &amp; Wesson was targeted back in the 19th century by the Knights of Labor in a dispute that had more to do with labor issues than its product line., But Smith &amp; Wesson was hit hard by a boycott a dozen years ago, after it reached an agreement with the Clinton administration to adopt gun safety measures in order to settle state and federal lawsuits. It laid off hundreds of workers in 2000, and its stock price and profits languished, although the company recovered over the course of the next several years., There may not be a direct boycott of guns launched in the coming weeks and months. Those advocating tighter restrictions on guns aren't likely to be regular customers to begin with. You can't boycott a product you're not buying anyway right now, says Fred Taub, president of Boycott Watch, a group that casts a skeptical eye on boycott campaigns., Despite the current change in climate, gun sales aren't likely to suffer in the coming weeks. After recent highly publicized shootings, gun sales have gone up, whether because people were nervous about defending themselves, or they wanted to stock up as a hedge against potential restrictions., Is It Different This Time?, And it's possible the current intense interest among the media and the public will soon shift elsewhere, allowing stock prices of gun makers to rebound. It's not abnormal for companies to have quick declines and then return to where they were before some horrific event, says King, the Northwestern professor., But the specter of new gun laws is going to depress stock prices in the industry as long as there's serious discussion in Washington., It often seems in the initial moments that [consumer activism] may rise to a very high level and create change, but that usually doesn't happen, says Glickman, the consumer historian. It does strike me that in this case, that's not going to happen this time., Newtown might be different. There's something especially horrific and easy to visualize about the massacre of first-graders in their classrooms. This kind of worry, particularly for parents, is not going to go away, Chavis says., What's more, the most recent tragedy has had a certain compounding effect, offering a stark reminder of the numerous other mass shootings that have occurred in recent months., Consumer activism often works that way, Glickman says. There's an accumulation of things, but one action or event becomes symbolic of a broader problem., We've yet to see whether consumers and investors will remain upset enough about guns for a long enough period of time to have a lasting impact on gun makers and sellers., But if they do, it will put additional pressure on politicians to enact legislation and act as a potential counter to efforts of the heavily organized gun lobby., As a voter and citizen, you want to give politicians and retailers a way to promote your position, Chavis says.
The issue of gun control appears to have moved into business and finance. One of the largest private equity companies in the country is terminating its relationship with a firearms corporation associated with one of the weapons used in the Newtown school shooting., Private equity firm, Cerberus, issued a statement today saying last Friday's school massacre is 'a watershed event' and it wants to avoid being drawn into the national debate over gun control. So, it's selling off its investments in Freedom Group, a firm that it acquired in 2006., Freedom Group declares it's the world's leading innovator, designer, manufacturer and marketer of firearms, ammunition and related products for the hunting, shooting sports, law enforcement and military markets. Its website lists products from Remington to Barnes Bullets to Bushmaster weapons. Police say shooter Adam Lanza used a Bushmaster AR-15 rifle to kill most of the children, teachers and staff at Sandy Hook Elementary School last Friday., Why is Cerberus acting so quickly? It may be more than the mood of the country. It could be pressure from the second biggest pension fund in the country: the California State Teachers' Retirement System. Reuters says CalSTRS, as it's known, is looking over its Cerberus investments. According to the CalSTRS website, it's invested $751.4 million dollars in Cerberus as of March 31, 2012., Cerberus' statement says its company is made up of investors, not policy makers, and its job is to make the best decisions for these investors, who include firemen, teachers, police officers, unions and others. It's not our role to take positions, or attempt to shape or influence the gun control policy debate. That is the job of our federal and state legislators., Cerberus isn't the only company that could experience pressure. California Treasurer Bill Lockyer is asking the teachers' pension and the California Public Employees' Retirement System how much they've invested in gun manufacturers. He's on the board of directors of both pension funds, and he wants them to divest their stakes in such companies, according to Bloomberg News., In related news, Dick's Sporting Goods is suspending sales of modern sporting rifles in all its stores around the country. They've also cut off gun sales in its store closest to Newtown and banned their display.
Flowers, candles and stuffed animals make up a makeshift memorial in Newtown, Conn., on Monday. Much of the initial news coverage of Friday's events was later found to be inaccurate., Flowers, candles and stuffed animals make up a makeshift memorial in Newtown, Conn., on Monday. Much of the initial news coverage of Friday's events was later found to be inaccurate., Nearly everyone reported so many things wrong in the first 24 hours after the Sandy Hook shootings that it's hard to single out any one news organization or reporter for criticism., Among the news outlets that wrongly reported major parts of the journalistic building blocks of who, what, where, when, why and how, were CBS, The Associated Press, The New York Times and NPR a veritable honor roll of the mainstream media. Many of the reports relied on unnamed law enforcement officials, typically federal, or even the vaguer the authorities, in at least one instance., &ldquo; [In any major story] there's going to be a massive, fast conversation on social media, and on Twitter in particular, trying to figure out everything they can about anyone whose name has appeared. And the idea the professionals have nothing to do with that conversation strikes me as a bad idea., - Ben Smith, Buzzfeed, The citation of federal sources typically indicated the nature of the Washington- and New York-based reporters doing the reporting, rather than the originating sources of information itself., A Series Of Mistakes, Just before 3 p.m. ET Friday, for example, Fox News told viewers that cops had identified the shooter as a 24-year-old man named Ryan Lanza. Not on the record, they hadn't, and it wasn't Ryan Lanza. CNN went a step further, quoting a federal law enforcement official who told the network's John King that Ryan Lanza was not a stranger to the school., There is currently no known evidence linking the actual shooter Ryan's younger brother Adam to the school. On MSNBC, reporters told viewers that the shooter's apartment in Hoboken, N.J., was being searched by police (again wrong it was Ryan's apartment) and that he walked into his mother's kindergarten class and fatally shot her there before murdering her students., In fact, local police soon enough announced, on the record, that Lanza's mother, Nancy, was killed at her home; school officials said she did not teach kindergarten, nor any grade or course at the school; that she did not work there nor did they have record that she was a volunteer. As a result, the principal did not admit the shooter inside the campus because he was known to her, as was wrongly reported by various outlets. Police later said he had physically forced his way inside., Another report that Adam Lanza had confronted teachers the day before the shooting proved equally mistaken., It was journalistic bedlam., Some news outlets signaled their mistakes and that stories were shifting; others glossed over them with updated information, as though they had held the facts all along. But it led to a dizzying sense of impermanence to any description of what had actually transpired., A guy was misidentified as a mass murderer, said Ben Smith, editor-in-chief of BuzzFeed, which straddles the worlds of traditional news outlets and social media platforms. That's horrendous., BuzzFeed relied on reporting from CNN and other outlets identifying the wrong brother, Ryan, as the killer and then took the additional step only now possible: Its staffers chased down his picture and postings on his Facebook page and slapped his own image and words on the site. It was not alone in doing so., The New York Times' public editor, Margaret Sullivan, argues in a blog post containing a staggering rundown of the paper's errors that its journalistic missteps were driven by the push to meet the speed of expected social media platforms., A Change In Consumption, Not Coverage, For many journalists, the misguided stories fall under the rubric of the fog of war the truism that first reports amid chaos are likely to be the least accurate. It's true and yet has cloaked many a journalistic sin over the years. But even in the pre-Internet age, journalists have also been badly mistaken., In just one of many examples, all three broadcast television networks reported that then-White House Press Secretary James Brady had been killed in the assassination attempt on President Reagan. He survived and became one of the nation's leading gun control advocates., In this case, the stories were off the mark, but reporters didn't make them up. By all indications, law enforcement officials offered mistaken leads in many cases to reporters they knew for years, yet news organizations chose not to wait until such factual material was confirmed on the record., Buzzfeed's Ben Smith has worked in the past for more conventional outlets such as the Indianapolis Star, the New York Daily News and Politico. He said coverage of such crises has not changed, but the way in which reporters construct it and readers and viewers consume it has. Now, he said, the assemblage of the news is playing out in full view and in real time., [In any major story] there's going to be a massive, fast conversation on social media, and on Twitter in particular, trying to figure out everything they can about anyone whose name has appeared, Smith said. And the idea the professionals have nothing to do with that conversation strikes me as a bad idea., And yet, as a result, millions of people will remember the face of the wrong guy as a killer of children, until the media darts en masse in an entirely different direction like a vast school of small fish., It took writer Dave Cullen a decade to report and write an authoritative account of the 1999 shootings at Columbine High School in Colorado. He said the media had established to its own satisfaction exactly why the teens turned into killers within just a few days., Thanks to the media, Cullen said, We knew unequivocally that they were kind of loner outcasts goths from the trench coat mafia, who had done this as a revenge slaying, primarily against jocks to pay them back for the relentless bullying they had undergone., One problem: Cullen found that none of that was true. He argued it is unfair to expect precision from the media immediately after a crisis starts, but that journalists must move with lightning speed to correct themselves., Yet such errant reporting in Connecticut created an opportunity for real harm., In the meantime, all sorts of people jump to all sorts of conclusions about what that means and why he did it, and I thought that was irresponsible, Cullen said., Amid catastrophe and crisis, the media is writing in pencil, erasing it and trying again. So in stories like these, the first draft of history isn't even a draft. It's just raw notes, waiting for rewrite.
Cyndy Aafedt (left) owns the El Rancho hotel in Williston, N.D. Jobs in town have been hard to fill. Her employee, Mary Joy Hardt (right), who is from the Philippines, is one of many people with J-1 visas helping to fill retail, hotel and restaurant job openings here., Cyndy Aafedt (left) owns the El Rancho hotel in Williston, N.D. Jobs in town have been hard to fill. Her employee, Mary Joy Hardt (right), who is from the Philippines, is one of many people with J-1 visas helping to fill retail, hotel and restaurant job openings here., The population boom in Williston, N.D., has been a blessing and a curse for many local businesses. Williston, the fastest growing small city in America, is enjoying an oil boom and has seen its population double in the past two years., At the city's brand new McDonald's, manager Vern Brekhus struggles every day to maintain his staff of nearly 100 workers., It's a pain, it's a real pain, Brekhus says. His staff used to be in an upbeat mood, he says. Now it's like, how many people do I gotta hire today? How many people do I gotta let go because they didn't show up? It never quits., Brekhus says the difficulty isn't hiring people, but keeping them., We may hire 'em; we won't see 'em. They won't show up for one day's worth of work. They can just go down the street and get another job, Brekhus says., But not everyone quits. Kyle Pfifer moved to Williston from a town in Tennessee where he couldn't find a job. For him, making $11 an hour at a fast food restaurant is a big step up. An oil job might pay three times that. But for now, he's more comfortable working indoors., Kyle Pfifer works at a McDonald's in Williston, a job he got the same day he applied. He says he turned in his application, got lunch, and I had a call before I was done eating, and I had a job., Kyle Pfifer works at a McDonald's in Williston, a job he got the same day he applied. He says he turned in his application, got lunch, and I had a call before I was done eating, and I had a job., With the weather being the way it's gonna be or with the way these people say it's gonna be, I don't know if I want to be out in negative 80 degree weather with the wind blowing and everything, Pfifer says., But for every worker who stays, there are two more who leave., For some, the pay is still too low because the cost of living, especially housing, is soaring., Some residents, like 16-year-old Gabriel Ramirez, find roommates. Ramirez moved to Williston from Oregon to find a job. He has seven roommates., Three people share the living room, and two other people share one room, and three other people share the other one, Ramirez says., Shawn Wenko, assistant director of economic development in Williston, says rents have been a huge challenge., If you look back several years ago, you probably could have found a two-bedroom apartment for $300 to $500 a month. We've seen huge increases over the years to anywhere from $2,000 to $2,500 a month for a single bedroom apartment here, Wenko says. So we're seeing Manhattan rates, if not above Manhattan rates., The city is now racing to meet the demand for housing. This year, 1,000 apartments were built, and another 2,000 should be finished next spring., There's also an acute day care shortage. Mothers who might want to work at a store or restaurant feel they have no choice but to stay home with their kids., Parents are desperate for any kind of child care, says Liz Fox, the director of Little Lambs Childcare, which was started last summer to help meet the demand. Before we even opened, as of Jan. 1, we had a waiting list that almost was seven pages long., Yet the center is less than half full because Fox can't find workers. Her competition isn't in the oil fields; it's in retail and in local restaurants., It's hard to compete with wages in Williston when Wal-Mart offers $17 an hour, and our starting salary is $12 or $10 an hour, Fox says., Wenko says building more housing and day care are the city's top two priorities. But he says businesses also have to do their part., It's a giant puzzle where everything is a piece that needs to come together. You have to be creative. You can't just put a sign in the window and say, 'Help wanted right now,' Wenko says. You've got to do some sort of housing stipend. You need to include some sign-on bonuses in there., And the hiring crunch is spreading. A Midwestern chain of home improvement stores is now flying employees to North Dakota from Wisconsin to work at its store in Minot, more than 100 miles east of Williston., But that company and many others wanting to open stores in Williston are waiting for the supply of housing and day care to grow enough so that the employees they hire will be able to stay in their jobs.
(Scroll down for a Tuesday morning update.), On Wall Street, investors appear to be listening closely to the growing talk in Washington about curbing assault weapons., Share prices for gun makers were down when the stock market closed Monday, on an otherwise positive trading day. The S&P; 500 Index, a broad measure of stock performance, was up nearly 1.2 percent, but shares of Smith &amp; Wesson Holding Corp. tumbled 5.2 percent, to $8.65. On Friday the day a gunman shot and killed 20 young children in Newtown, Conn. the company's value fell 4 percent., Smith &amp; Wesson's share price had peaked at just over $11 in early December, following President Obama's November re-election. Earlier this month, the company said its revenue had surged 48 percent in the three months that ended Oct. 31 just as the presidential campaign was wrapping up., In the run-up to the election, analysts had predicted the autumn sales gain, saying they expected consumers to stockpile weapons if it appeared Obama would win a second term., But investors appear more concerned now about the long-term outlook for restrictions on gun sales rather than the short-term sales bounce following the election., Sturm Ruger &amp; Co., another gun maker, saw its stock price drop 3.45 percent Monday, after tumbling more than 4 percent Friday., Most firearms manufacturers don't sell stock to the public. The private companies include Colt Firearms, Beretta USA, Herstal Group (the parent company for Browning and Winchester). The list also includes Bushmaster, which produces the AR-15 rifle, one of the weapon used by the Newtown gunman., Cabela's Inc., a Nebraska-based retailer that sells hunting and fishing gear, saw its stock fall 2.7 percent Monday, after a 1 percent drop on Friday. In September, The Wall Street Journal quoted a Cabela spokesman saying the company had seen a 25 percent increase in new gun buyers immediately following the 2008 election., Speaking at a memorial service in Newtown Sunday, Obama promised to use whatever power he has to prevent mass killings., Support for gun control appeared to grow Monday, as prominent figures spoke out in favor of change. New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg, an independent, called for tighter controls., And West Virginia's Sen. Joe Manchin, a Democrat who is a longtime member of the NRA, said officials should look at possible changes to mental-health treatment as well as laws involving military-style assault weapons and high capacity magazines., RGR data by YCharts, Update at 10 a.m. ET, Dec. 18. Slide Continues:, On Tuesday morning, investors continued dumping the shares of gun manufacturers. On Wall Street, shares of Smith &amp; Wesson Holding Corp. fell another 8.7 percent in the first half hour of trading, down to $7.90., Sturm Ruger &amp; Co., another gun maker, lost 5.68 percent in the same 30 minutes, down to $41.50., In other news Tuesday morning, Cerberus Capital, a private equity firm, said in a statement that it's looking to sell its stake in the Freedom Group, a gun manufacturer that made one of the weapons used in Friday's shootings in Newtown, Conn.
Hasbro's pink Easy-Bake Oven is under fire for reinforcing gender stereotypes., Hasbro's pink Easy-Bake Oven is under fire for reinforcing gender stereotypes., We've been focusing on some serious news today. Here's something on the lighter side., A New Jersey teenager who launched a campaign to get Hasbro to make a gender-neutral Easy-Bake Oven is expected to meet with the toy company Monday afternoon., Update at 5:40 p.m. ET. Easy-Bake Oven goes gender-neutral:, After meeting with Pope, Hasbro now says it plans to introduce a new black, silver, and blue model of the oven, and to feature boys in ads for the product. Our original post continues:, According to The Associated Press, the oven's team at Hasbro invited 13-year-old McKenna Pope of Garfield, N.J., to share her thoughts and ideas. McKenna wants the company to make the pink and purple oven in more boy-friendly colors and also feature boys in their marketing for the toy. The oven, she says, reinforces gender stereotypes to the point that her younger brother thinks boys shouldn't cook., We continue to enforce this stereotype that men don't cook, they work, Pope says in a YouTube video created as part of her effort to get Hasbro to change the way it makes and markets the toy oven. Her online petition has garnered 44,000 supporters since it was launched in November and has the backing of top chefs like Bobby Flay., (Incidentally, the oven hasn't always been pink. Introduced in 1963, it's been green, yellow and orange. It turned gender-specific pink in 1993.), Pope's campaign seems to be part of heightened gender messaging awareness in toys this holiday season., In Sweden, a toy company recently revamped the way it advertises toys to boys and girls. The company, Top Toy, was told by a Swedish regulator to stop advertising using stereotypes, toy analyst Sean McGowan of Needham &amp; Co. tells NPR's David Greene. So in Top Toy's 2012 Christmas catalog, boys are shown playing with a pink ironing board set, for example, and girls are shown playing with a Nerf rifle., I think what they were worried about was causing gender identification needlessly to turn off passive learning, passive expression down the road, even passive economic opportunity for girls or boys if they felt they couldn't do something because of societal norms, McGowan says., Time will tell, McGowan says, whether trying to take gender out of toys will affect play habits., It'll be interesting to see how this changes the attitudes of parents and of kids over time or whether or not it does. There may be some hard-wired differences, he says., Meanwhile, Lego has developed and marketed a line of toys specifically to girls after researching for years how to get girls to play with the toy bricks. The Lego Friends line includes a cafe, a vet's office and a pet salon. The figures, McGowan notes, are bigger and are more realistic than other figures because Lego learned that girls see them as avatars of themselves., By unlocking that mystery what is it that the girls are looking for out of the play? Lego was able to get a lot of girls and hundreds of millions of dollars in revenue just in one year, whereas they couldn't get that before, McGowan says., Ultimately, for good or bad, there really are just fundamental differences between boys and girls, he says., I don't think anybody here is kidding themselves that we're going to get girls to like all boys toys and boys to like all girls toys, McGowan says. But I think it's a noble effort to say, 'I have a product I believe in, that I think is good for kids what can I do to make it more attractive to more of those kids?'
Sign of the times: Markdowns at a discount clothing store in New York City last month. Such stiff competition for consumers' dollars is helping to keep inflation in check., A sharp drop in the cost of a gallon of gasoline helped pull consumer prices down 0.3 percent in November, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reports., According to BLS, gas prices plunged 7.4 percent last month., Excluding the food and energy sectors, the so-called core rate of inflation rose just 0.1 percent., Reuters notes that the overall decline points to muted inflation pressures that should allow the Federal Reserve to stay on its ultra-easy monetary policy path as it nurses the economy back to health., The drop followed a scant 0.1 percent increase in October. The inflation rate, which spiked in August and September when gas prices rose sharply, now appears to be back in check. Stiff competition for consumers' dollars especially the price cuts many retailers are advertising is also helping to hold inflation down., For the year ended Nov. 30, the consumer price index is up 1.8 percent., Related news: Inflation Index Fix Could Cut Federal Deficit., From 'Morning Edition': Does The CPI Need A Fix?
Shawn Rux took over as principal of MS 53, a New York City middle school, last year. At the time, 50 or 60 kids were absent every day. You could understand why they stayed away: The school was chaos., Twenty-two teachers had quit, the entire office staff had quit, and hundreds of kids had been suspended. The school was given a grade of F from the city's department of education., It was in a bad place, Rux says., Rux decided he needed to create incentives for kids to come to school. Incentives that were more obvious to middle-school kids than, If you come to school you'll be better off 20 years from now., He handed out raffle tickets to anyone who showed up to school on time. One of the prizes was an Xbox. And he threw in an element of randomness: The first kids in line when the doors opened might get 20 tickets., It worked. Kids started showing up early. It was ... like, 'Get out of my way, I'm trying to get into school,' Rux says. It was nice. Rux also created his own currency. He called it Rux Bux. Teachers hand them out when kids are well behaved. They can be traded in for school supplies, or special lunches. A sixth-grader named Wander Rodriguez is trying to save up 5,000 Rux Bux enough for a personal shopping spree with Rux., The principal also stands outside school every morning, greeting the students as they show up. This recognition is another, subtler incentive to come to school. I like this school, Wander Rodriguez says. They treat me like home, they treat me nice, they always give me stuff. ... They always say 'hi' in the mornings. The school went from an F to a C. Daily attendance went up to over 90 percent. Then the hurricane hit., The school is in Far Rockaway, Queens one of the areas hardest hit by the storm. Some kids' homes were destroyed. One student who stayed at home through the storm told a teacher, My apartment complex was in the middle of the ocean. Rux's car was destroyed. The first floor of his house was flooded. After the storm, after school started up again, Rux's goal was to get attendance back to 90 percent. Every day, his staff texts him the attendance numbers. The day I visited last week, 89.2 percent of students attended school. Close, but not close enough for Rux., The storm has been tough on everyone, he says. But that's no excuse. Kids have to be in school.
To save money, 30-year-old Alisha Mustafa runs her small pie-making business out of the kitchen of another restaurant., Thirty-year-old Alisha Mustafa spent years working at low-paying restaurant jobs. The unemployment rate hovers around 10 percent in her hometown of Bloomington, Ind., I've worked it all in this town, she says. I've worked for so many restaurants, and last year was my year from hell in the industry., So, she quit and started her own business. Now, she spends most days baking treats like gluten-free strawberry mango pie for her business, Mustafa Pie Co., More young people like Mustafa are fighting the slow job market by doing exactly what she did: building something of their own. According to a survey from last year, 54 percent of the nation's millennials ages 18 to 34 want to start a business or already have., Don Kuratko, the chairman of entrepreneurship at Indiana University, says that kind of enthusiasm is common when the economy dips and career track jobs dry up. But, the current surge of entrepreneurship seems to be attracting a new kind of business, he says. It's called the lean startup., It's become very popular, Kuratko says. It talks about starting with the very micro-enterprise idea and moving quickly into your market and testing it and getting customers right away, and trying to generate some revenue and use that revenue to grow on that., In Columbus, Ind., Steve Riche started his own specialized Web design firm. He says he hated his human resources job at a big auto parts manufacturer and decided to work out of his house instead. His desk is now covered in action figures, and miniature superhero models spill out of his drawer., Since leaving my respectable day job, I've kind of embraced my inner child again, Riche says., He works mostly from his couch, which he says is crucial to his business plan., We've been able to run the business and not have any kind of loan hanging over our head with the idea that if things don't pan out, then OK, we'll walk away scot-free and find jobs elsewhere and not be indebted to anyone, he says., Even if Riche ever did decide to work outside a living room, getting a business loan would be tough. According to a recent Federal Reserve report, small businesses are facing some of the strictest loan requirements in almost two decades., Riche seems to be doing just fine for now. His company currently has major contracts with several area banks and the city's hospital., Amber Fischvogt, director of the Columbus Area Chamber of Commerce, helped Riche's business grow from a client base of few friends into an established firm. She says the idea of starting a couch-based business has exploded because it's easy to find the resources., If you look at barriers to entry maybe 20 years ago and think about computers, technology, access to resources and then you look at it today the barriers are dropped tremendously, Fischvogt says., But before you start calling this uptick in millennial entrepreneurship an economic victory, consider that it's still very risky to start a business from scratch. Studies show that about 80 percent of all startups fail within the first few years., Now, add that sobering statistic to the findings of a University of Tennessee study. The No. 1 reason new businesses fall short? Inexperience.
The Consumer Price Index is one of the most familiar measures in economics and politics. But some in Washington want to change the way the index is calculated to better reflect people's shopping habits., While the proposed change is described as a technical fix, it could also cut the federal deficit by hundreds of billions of dollars over the next decade., It's a small number, but the inflation measure can make big waves. It's used to adjust Social Security and other retirement benefits. And like any government statistic with the potential to move markets, it's a closely guarded secret until the official announcement., The areas where the people that produce the CPI work are certainly sealed off from everyone else during this period, says John Greenlees, who heads the Division of Price and Index Number Research for the government., The Bureau of Labor Statistics' latest announcement, on Friday morning, showed consumer prices inched down 0.3 percent in November helped in part by a sharp drop in the cost of gasoline., To come up with this little number, Greenlees says, an army of consumer lookouts roam the country looking for changing prices., They visit stores and doctor's offices and barber shops and hospitals, collecting prices throughout the month, he says., These part-time government shoppers compare the same basket of goods and services every month, to see which prices have gone up and which have gone down, and they crunch those numbers together to get the Consumer Price Index., The only problem, say critics, is that's not how consumers actually shop., If the price of turkey goes up and I buy more ham, or if the price of oranges goes up and so I buy more apples, that's not accounted for in the current price index, says Marc Goldwein of the nonpartisan, nonprofit Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget. It thinks I continue to buy those oranges, no matter how expensive they get., Goldwein wants to adjust the inflation measure so instead of comparing the same basket month after month, analysts would make substitutions, just the way real shoppers do. He stresses that he's not talking about customers who reluctantly switch to an inferior product., It's not as if people are always going from steak down to chicken. Sometimes people are going from chicken to steak, he says., The federal government already calculates this alternative measure of inflation. It's called chained CPI. And over the past decade, it has typically shown prices rising a little more slowly than the regular Consumer Price Index about a quarter to a third of a percent slower each year. That might not sound like much, but over time it adds up., If the government switched to chained CPI for cost-of-living adjustments, Social Security payments and other benefits would grow more slowly. And tax revenues would go up, because parts of the tax code are also indexed to inflation., Goldwein, who worked for the Simpson-Bowles commission, estimates that the switch would shave more than $200 billion off the deficit over the next decade. Because most of those savings would come in later years, it wouldn't be an immediate drag on the economy., Given that the economy is still weak, we don't want massive amounts of deficit reduction right now, Goldwein says. That's the whole reason we're avoiding the 'fiscal cliff.' It's too much deficit reduction too fast. The chained CPI is the best of all worlds, because it gives you a credible way to reduce future deficits but with barely any effect in the short term., But some seniors are up in arms over the idea., Cristina Martin Firvida of AARP says if Social Security payments grew more slowly, the very elderly would suffer the most. She also complains that chained CPI doesn't reflect the actual cost of living for seniors., Obviously, more of their money goes to health care. Health care grows faster than inflation. And if folks want to have a conversation about accuracy, we would welcome adoption of a more accurate market basket. And one that really reflects the spending patterns of the retired and the disabled, Firvida says., The government actually has another inflation measure that's specially tailored for seniors. Unlike chained CPI, it tends to show more inflation rather than less. That measure is based on a smaller sample, though, and it's not officially recognized., Congressional Republicans call for switching to chained CPI in their deficit-cutting proposal. So far, President Obama has been noncommittal., Goldwein says despite the controversy, chained CPI is one of the least painful deficit-cutting moves the government could make. If there is any big budget bargain, he says, the new inflation measure is likely to be part of it.
HSBC has agreed to pay $1.92 billion to settle a multiyear U.S. criminal probe into money-laundering lapses at the British lender, the largest penalty ever paid by a bank., HSBC has agreed to pay $1.92 billion to settle a multiyear U.S. criminal probe into money-laundering lapses at the British lender, the largest penalty ever paid by a bank., Federal and state authorities have received criticism after deciding not to indict HSBC on accusations that it laundered money for Mexican drug cartels and conducted prohibited transactions on behalf of countries like Iran and Sudan. Instead, they entered into a $1.9 billion settlement this week with the bank., There's no question that HSBC is a massive, sprawling operation. It markets itself as the world's local bank. But watchdogs of the banking industry say mere size should never insulate an organization from the law., Well, if the company is too big to jail, too big to prosecute, too big to indict, then it's just simply too big to exist, says Robert Weissman, president of the consumer advocacy group Public Citizen., For law professors, the question of who should get indicted, even if they do break the law, isn't an easy one. It's not just an issue of whether the economy would fail if HSBC collapsed it's a deeper question about the purpose of the criminal justice system., What's so wonderful about an indictment? The question is: What are we trying to achieve here? says Hal Scott, director of the Program on International Financial Systems at Harvard Law School., He says to forget about indicting a bank: Banks don't break the law, people do. And people aren't too big to fail or too big to go to jail., Not a single individual at HSBC has been charged with the very conduct the bank admits happened, Scott says. And unfortunately, he adds, that's probably because it's just a lot easier to nail a bank. Charging people with crimes means more trials, which requires more money, time and evidence., You can go into the bank and say, 'Well, I think you did something wrong, and I'm thinking of indicting you, and you better pay a big fine,' and, you know, they'll agree to it, says Scott. It's not their money., And that, he notes, is the perverse thing about the HSBC settlement: That $2 billion is coming from shareholders, not from the people who broke the law., But the settlement averted an indictment, and authorities thought that was the best outcome for the economy. Some legal experts, like Duke Law professor James Cox, agree. He says it would have been a disaster if HSBC was charged with crimes., Indicting a large bank like HSBC would create a huge regulatory ripple if not an embolism around the world, Cox says., When a bank is convicted of a crime, it could lose its banking license, and certain pension plans may be required to pull out their funds, he adds. That could have hemorrhaged HSBC enough to make it shut down., And because banks are constantly borrowing and lending money to each other, all of those transactions would have to be unwound quickly. Cash would need to appear immediately cash that may not be there. Businesses might freeze activity., John Coffee, a professor at Columbia Law School, scoffs at that doomsday scenario., I don't think anyone can confidently say what the economic impact on HSBC would be, Coffee says. I doubt that it would have failed., And even if by some chance it did fail, he says HSBC isn't as important to the global economy as JPMorgan or Bank of America. The regulators just got skittish, he says, and did the safe thing: They took a big fat fine and called it a day.
Source: Lego, Mega Brands Inc., World Bank, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo/NPR, I went to Toys R Us recently to buy my son a Lego set for Hanukkah. Did you know a small box of Legos costs $60? Sixty bucks for 102 plastic blocks!, In fact, I learned, Lego sets can sell for thousands of dollars. And despite these prices, Lego has about 70 percent of the construction-toy market. Why? Why doesn't some competitor sell plastic blocks for less? Lego's patents expired a while ago. How hard could it be to make a cheap knockoff?, Luke, a 9-year-old Lego expert, set me straight., They pay attention to so much detail, he said. I never saw a Lego piece ... that couldn't go together with another one., Lego goes to great lengths to make its pieces really, really well, says David Robertson, who is working on a book about Lego., Inside every Lego brick, there are three numbers, which identify exactly which mold the brick came from and what position it was in in that mold. That way, if there's a bad brick somewhere, the company can go back and fix the mold., For decades this is what kept Lego ahead. It's actually pretty hard to make millions of plastic blocks that all fit together., But over the past several years, a competitor has emerged: Mega Bloks. Plastic blocks that look just like Legos, snap onto Legos and are often half the price., So Lego has tried other ways to stay ahead., The company tried to argue in court that no other company had the legal right to make stacking blocks that look like Legos., That didn't fly, Robertson says. Every single country that Lego tried to make that argument in decided against Lego., But Lego did find a successful way to do something Mega Bloks could not copy: It bought the exclusive rights to Star Wars. If you want to build a Death Star out of plastic blocks, Lego is now your only option., The Star Wars blocks were wildly successful. So Lego kept going it licensed Indiana Jones, Winnie the Pooh, Toy Story and Harry Potter., Sales of these products have been huge for Lego. More important, the experience has taught the company that what kids wanted to do with the blocks was tell stories. Lego makes or licenses the stories they want to tell., And kids know the difference., If you were talking to a friend you wouldn't say, 'Oh my God, I just got a big set of Mega Bloks,' Luke says. When you say Legos they would probably be like, 'Awesome can we go to your house and play?' , Lego made almost $3.5 billion in revenue last year. Mega made a tenth of that., But Mega Bloks may yet gain on Lego., Mega now owns the rights to Thomas the Tank Engine, Hello Kitty, and the video game Halo. And, on shelves for the first time ever this week: Mega Bloks Barbies.
President Obama examines a K'NEX roller coaster on Nov. 30 at a Hatfield, Pa., factory that makes the toys. During the visit, Obama spoke about the economy, the middle class and his plan to raise taxes on top wage earners., President Obama examines a K'NEX roller coaster on Nov. 30 at a Hatfield, Pa., factory that makes the toys. During the visit, Obama spoke about the economy, the middle class and his plan to raise taxes on top wage earners., Every time President Obama explains why he wants to increase taxes on the richest 2 percent, Republicans have a ready answer: Most small business owners file their taxes as individuals, and a rate hike would discourage them from hiring new workers., So when Obama visited the K'NEX factory in Pennsylvania recently to push for his tax plan, House Republicans countered with a campaign-style video, also featuring a Pennsylvania business., In it, Gorski Engineering's owner, Jerry Gorski, explains how his company is set up as a subchapter S corporation under the tax code. So however good or bad we do is my income, he says., But how does that back up the fundamental Republican argument, that a higher tax rate would make it harder for him to hire new workers?, Actually, it doesn't. Which is why, Gorski told NPR in an interview, he specifically avoided saying that in the video. I don't know that that would be true for my business or a different business unless we understood the complete situation., Some of these situations, said other business owners, are such that the higher tax rate could actually act as an incentive to hire more employees or invest in new equipment., Because that would then lower your potential tax rate, said Mike Brey, owner of Hobby Works, a group of toy stores in the Washington, D.C., area., If this seems counterintuitive, the answer lies in the way businesses calculate their taxes. Obama's proposal would increase the tax rate, but only for income that exceeds a quarter-million dollars per household., For some 97 percent of small business owners, that higher rate is irrelevant. They make less than $250,000 a year., And for those whose income works out to be just over that threshold, one way out of paying that higher tax rate could be to hire one more person or finally replace that 10-year-old car. These investments would pull net income back under that quarter-million-dollar mark, out of range of that higher rate., I think if you're a person who hates paying taxes, hiring another employee for thirty- or forty-thousand a year is a great way to stay below the new so-called marginal rate, said Mike Roach, who has owned Paloma Clothing in Portland, Ore., for 37 years., There are situations, though, where Obama's proposed higher rates would make it tougher for particular small businesses to expand., Owners of franchise restaurants, for example, who need to save up tens of thousands of dollars in cash so they can open up a new eatery, would have a harder time. Such savings are treated as business profit and, therefore, in the case of most small businesses, personal income prior to the reinvestment., If that money is taxed at 35 percent instead of 31 percent, it would take somewhat longer to get to the necessary goal, said Don Fox, CEO of Florida-based Firehouse Subs., Jerry Gorski similarly faces that higher tax rate when he saves up for a number of years to hire a highly paid employee or a piece of earth-moving equipment., If I start to build a nest egg again, if I start to invest in equipment and things but I don't have as much to do that, or invest in people, which is our biggest resource, I don't have as much to do that, that's going to be difficult, Gorski said., Of course, when Gorski finally does hire that expensive employee or buys that pricey backhoe, he will have a large, new expense he can write off potentially offsetting some or most of the extra taxes he had to pay earlier., Brey, the owner of Hobby Works, says there's really nothing new or unusual about taking the tax code into account when making business decisions., The fact of the matter is, businesses, all businesses, large and small, do this all the time, he said., One business strategy is to continually plow extra profit back into the business to avoid those higher tax rates. Eventually, the owner can sell the business or take it public, and convert those years of deferred income into a big cash payout., And depending on how it's handled, selling a business can be considered capital gains, taxed at a lower rate right now, Brey said, a much lower rate., S.V. Dte is the congressional editor on NPR's Washington Desk.
At a job fair in New York City earlier this year, a man waited for an interview. Economists say the job market is slowly improving, and the latest data on jobless claims seem to support that analysis., At a job fair in New York City earlier this year, a man waited for an interview. Economists say the job market is slowly improving, and the latest data on jobless claims seem to support that analysis., There were 343,000 first-time claims for unemployment benefits last week, down 29,000 from the week before, according to the Employment and Training Administration., At that level, claims were the lowest they'd been since the first week of October's 342,000., According to Bloomberg News, last week's number adds to evidence the labor market is improving. It was well below what economists expected: 369,000. And, Bloomberg adds:, Jobless claims have dropped 108,000 in the latest four weeks after a Superstorm Sandy-related surge, indicating companies are comfortable with current staffing levels., The morning's other economic news: Wholesale prices fell 0.8 percent in November from October, the Bureau of Labor Statistics says. The major reason for the decline was a 4.6 percent drop in energy prices, which in turn was fueled by a 10.1 percent plunge in gasoline costs.
Of the 535 members of Congress, not many appear to be in the loop about the fiscal cliff negotiations. That makes the rest nervous about having to vote on a bill on short notice despite misgivings about what's in it. But this is often how major deals get accomplished in Washington., In these budget negotiations, the names Boehner and Obama come up most often and virtually all the rest are on the outside looking in., House Speaker John Boehner said Wednesday that there are still serious differences between him and President Obama when it comes to reaching an agreement to avoid the automatic spending cuts and tax increases in the new year., After a House Republican conference meeting where Boehner spoke to his troops, reporters asked North Carolina Rep. Walter Jones about the status of the talks. He had to answer that he didn't know., You get more information many times than most of us in the conference, Jones told the reporters. And I understand that. It's not a criticism. But there's just not much to tell us., He said Boehner is trying our best to negotiate but to keep with the principles of the conference., Those principles include a strong opposition to raising taxes, especially tax rates, and an equally strong desire to cut spending., California Republican John Campbell, a member of the House Budget Committee, doesn't have a seat at the negotiating table., You always worry when someone else is negotiating for something that I am going to be voting on, and sure I'm worried that it may be a deal I may not want to or feel comfortable supporting. But I don't know that yet. I don't think there's any indication of that at this point, Campbell says., It's not just rank-and-file representatives who are left out. House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, the top Democrat in the House, says the president is the Democrat's lead negotiator., He knows our views, she says. We trust his judgment. We all share the same values, and, again, we trust his leadership on this., Pelosi recently penned an editorial arguing against raising the Medicare eligibility age. And earlier this week, a group of Democrats held a news conference to say it would be a mistake to cut Medicaid at least in part to remind their negotiator-in-chief of their views., Illinois Sen. Dick Durbin, the second highest-ranking member of the Democratic leadership team, says the fiscal cliff talks are really all about two men, and he's at peace with that., Because I stand behind the president and what he's asking for, I feel comfortable with it. I've also seen the effectiveness and the perfidy of committees, so having two people who can make a decision engaged makes sense, Durbin says., Rarely have so many powerful people been so marginalized, and yet most seem to believe this is the only way., We're beyond the stage of hearings, we're beyond the stage of rooms where we could have a lot of people participating, says Joe Minarik, senior vice president at the Committee for Economic Development, a nonpartisan think tank., Minarik was involved in the 1986 tax overhaul. There were many more people at the table back then, but he says the process took years, and the deadline this time is just weeks away., We have to work so quickly that we need to get down to a very small number of people to make the decision. And that's why we have just the president and just the speaker at the table, Minarik says., But in the end, whatever they agree to has to get 218 votes in the House and most likely 60 votes in the Senate. And that's when all those members of Congress will be powerful again.
If a kid does something bad and you want to discipline him give him a timeout, say, or take away a toy there are some basic principles that seem to work. The punishment needs to happen quickly after the bad behavior. And it needs to be significant enough to get noticed. Those rules aren't just for kids; they need to hold true for any type of punishment to be effective., But if you're a federal regulator punishing a bank, it can be tough to be swift enough and to levee a penalty that's severe enough to make a difference., Take HSBC, the bank that just agreed to pay the U.S. government $1.9 billion to settle allegations that it laundered money for Mexican drug dealers. The bank's dealing with the drug dealers took place over a decade. This is justice very much delayed, and that may be to a degree justice denied, says John Coffee, a law professor at Columbia and an expert in prosecuting white-collar crime., Simply punishing the corporation, years after the crime, might not send the message you want, according to Coffee. The taking of billions of dollars in cash from Mexican drug cartels and funneling it into the U.S. into legitimate investments, that was done by individuals who knew what they were doing, and no one has been held accountable who is a flesh-and-blood human being, Coffee says., Then there's the amount of the penalty. These fines are large from the perspective of you and me, says William K. Black, a former federal regulator. From the perspective of the institution, they are simply a cost of doing business., Black points out that the $1.9 billion fine amounts to about one month of profits for the bank. There was something that the federal government could have done to punish the bank that really would have hurt: It could have indicted HSBC for laundering money for drug cartels. It could have revoked HSBC's federal insurance and made it impossible for the bank to operate in the United States. But Lanny Breuer from the Justice Department says the government didn't want to punish all of the innocent people who worked for the bank who would lose their jobs. He said when he announced the settlement this week that HSBC had cleaned house, was promising to have more oversight and was cooperating. We've gone after the cartels, we've gone after the traffickers, Breuer said. And in this particular case, we have held a financial institution absolutely accountable., But is $1.9 billion enough of a punishment to make all the other banks take notice? Will it scare bank managers out of doing business with shady clients? Clearly, no institution wants this kind of bad publicity. But in the past, Coffee says, the lessons that really shook up industries involved criminal indictments, not just money. Decades ago, for example, junk bond king Micheal Milken was charged with insider trading and went to jail. I think that sent a message for a decade to Wall Street that this was very dangerous behavior don't go anywhere near it, Coffee says. And I think that message was internalized. I think most people did understand and did obey that norm. HSBC agreed to pay money, sure. But the settlement was over quickly. So far, even the stock price is holding steady., Clarification: In an early radio version of this story, a former regulator was quoted speculating that Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner did not want to put HSBC out of business. We should have made it clear that it is the Justice Department, not the Treasury Department, that made the decision to defer prosecution of HSBC.
Etsy, which began as a place for home crafters and small businesses to sell their goods, has experienced growing pains as it surpasses 800,000 sellers., Etsy, which began as a place for home crafters and small businesses to sell their goods, has experienced growing pains as it surpasses 800,000 sellers., Etsy has gotten very big, very fast. This year, sales are at about $800 million., Their growth on all the major metrics you want to look at has accelerated really consistently, says journalist Rob Walker., Walker recently wrote a story for Wired Magazine with the headline, Can Etsy Go Pro Without Losing Its Soul? Here's why: Etsy makes money from its sellers: 20 cents every time they list an item and 3.5 percent of every sale. Today, there are some 800,000 sellers., But they don't all share the values Etsy promotes, which Walker calls a kind of moral purity of the handmade as a response to the alienation of mass-manufacturing culture., Etsy's CEO Chad Dickerson says the site is working on ways to retain sellers and weed out factory-made products., Etsy's CEO Chad Dickerson says the site is working on ways to retain sellers and weed out factory-made products., Walker says a lot of the almost-political ideas that were crucial when Etsy started are less crucial now to probably most of the sellers, but still very important to some of the sellers., Holding On To Sellers, Etsy has gotten so big, it's hard to know what motivates each seller., I was a government worker yearning for a more creative outlet, says Heather Noss., Four years ago, Noss quit her day job and opened a shop on Etsy, where she sells handmade stationery., I was at my kitchen table by myself for a year and a half rolling every single piece of paper, printing, cutting every single piece of paper, she says. I was my own bookkeeper., Pretty quickly, the books started filling up with orders for wedding invitations and Christmas cards. She hired an assistant. She rented studio space. But eventually her success became a loss for Etsy., I need more management tools that are not present on Etsy, Noss says. For example, she says, the messaging system made it tough to sort through a lot of customer emails., So Noss set up another business. Now, 80 percent of her revenue comes to her directly, and Etsy is making less off her than it used to., I love Etsy. I was able to make sales that I'm sure I never would have been able to make if I had attempted to, say, create my own website, Noss says., Etsy doesn't want its biggest sellers to go elsewhere. So it has made changes, like making it possible for sellers to take credit cards and offering online sales training., We're always looking for new ways to make our sellers more successful and find new channels for them to sell, says Etsy CEO Chad Dickerson., Even though e-commerce is growing, Dickerson says, the vast majority of retail sales still happen offline. So, Etsy partnered with the Williams-Sonoma retail chain West Elm., As West Elm opens up new stores around the country, they actually wholesale items from local Etsy sellers and put those items in the store, Dickerson says., Factories And Homemakers, But that also means that Etsy sellers will be in some shopping malls., It goes back to the ideology isn't Etsy supposed to be a response to the mall? Aren't we tearing down the mall? Walker says. I think that the new thinking is, instead of fighting traditional retail, we should figure out ways to infiltrate traditional retail on our own terms., Dickerson says one of those terms is handmade. But that's another problem Etsy has been having. Some sellers complain that there are mass-produced goods being sold on the site, says April Winchell, who started a blog called Regretsy., Let's say I'm a buyer and I'm looking for a wedding gown. One gown is $78 because it's from a factory in China, but the woman has a cute little name, like Joanie Sews, and so you think it's a person. And the other gown is $600 because it really is one woman trying to make this thing for you for your wedding, Winchell says. Which one are you going to buy? So it sets up unfair competition between factories and homemakers., Dickerson says Etsy does monitor the site; users flag shops that look suspicious and Etsy investigates., We ask for documentation and photos and basically proof of how the item is being produced and then we make a decision on whether to allow that item or that shop the ability to stay on Etsy, he says., Dickerson says the company is working to keep 800,000 sellers around the world happy. After all, sellers are Etsy's most important customers.
For the first time, the vaunted Westvleteren 12 beer has hit U.S. beer store shelves in large numbers. The bottle's Latin inscription reads, Ad aedificandam abbatiam adiuvi, or, I helped to build the abbey., For the first time, the vaunted Westvleteren 12 beer has hit U.S. beer store shelves in large numbers. The bottle's Latin inscription reads, Ad aedificandam abbatiam adiuvi, or, I helped to build the abbey., To many beer fans, the arrival of the Westvleteren 12 Trappist ale in American shops today is a chance to try a beer they've only read about on beer-geek blogs and sites where it's often given a world class rating of 100., But finding the beer can be tricky it's not available in all states, and some stores sold out of their allotment within hours of opening Wednesday., As NPR's Teri Schultz reported on Morning Edition today, the beer is being imported by Massachusetts-based Shelton Brothers. And although a relatively large shipment hit U.S. shores, the beer made by Belgium's St. Sixtus Abbey is still not widely available., Only 15,000 six-packs, priced at $85 each, were sent to the American market. To help would-be customers find out where to buy the beer, the distributor has listed all U.S. retail outlets online. And despite a price that seems stratospheric, the cost is well below what the special release's brick gift pack of six beers and two glasses is fetching on eBay, where bids routinely top $200., A Shelton Brothers representative told Schultz that the company was chosen to handle the U.S. release based on its previous work with another small Trappist brewer, Achel. Consider that Belgian breweries such as Chimay produce about 40 times the amount of beer that Achel or Westvleteren make in a normal year., And the monks of the St. Sixtus Abbey, whose order requires vows of poverty, set restrictions to make this release very unusual., For instance, stores have been asked not to reserve the beer or accept orders by phone, and customers are to be limited to a sole six-pack policies that were in place in at least two beer stores The Salt visited early Wednesday., The abbey's goal seems to have been to release the beer in a way that offers beer fans a chance to buy Westvleteren and to limit the secondary market for the beer. The monks have stressed that the special release is meant only to pay for their abbey's recent renovations., There also isn't much profit involved here, Shelton Brothers said in a statement posted online, as most everybody working on this has agreed to either donate back or forgo profits to help maximize the money going to the Abbey. No store that gets this beer is cashing in on it; at least we hope they aren't., Bolstering that idea, both the bottles and the goblet-shaped glasses that come in the U.S. six-packs of Westvleteren 12 bear a gilded message in Latin: Ad aedificandam abbatiam adiuvi roughly, I helped to build the abbey., A customer departs Total Wine of Towson, Md., with a gift pack of Belgium's Westvleteren 12 Trappist ale., A customer departs Total Wine of Towson, Md., with a gift pack of Belgium's Westvleteren 12 Trappist ale., The approach to the one-time U.S. release echoes the abbey's rules in Belgium, where customers can only use the same phone to place a beer order once in a set period (often, 60 days). When they pick the beer up, they must be in a car that hasn't been used to pick up beer in the same time frame., To control distribution in the U.S., the Westvleteren beer is being made available mostly through large retail chains to guarantee a single price shops in Hawaii reportedly received a special dispensation for a higher price to allow for the recovery of shipping charges., Despite the hefty price tag, demand for the beer seems to be strong. The Total Wine shop in Laurel, Md., sold out of the beers nearly in the first hour, said a manager. He added that some customers had camped out at the store's strip-mall location ahead of its 8 a.m. opening time. And in Chicago, customers reportedly got in line at 4 a.m., Still, not everyone is enthusiastic about the new Trappist on the block. Some folks seem to miss the veil of exclusivity that had separated beer connoisseurs from mere dilettantes. And the abbey's requirement of a single sales price means that most of the rare ale went to mainstream retailers, rather than the more fractured market of boutique and specialty stores., For instance, on Twitter, Bruisin' Ales cited More Westy nonsense... in Alabama, Westvleteren is being sold by PIGGLY WIGGLY. Good lord. This beer belongs in specialty shops. Period., Others, including several who commented on Schultz's story this morning, are outraged by the $85 sales price. They say that just because the monks took a vow of poverty, that doesn't mean the rest of us should join them, after buying their beer. Save your money, they say, and grab the venerable Abt 12 made by St. Bernardus., There are also some beer fanatics who are eager to buy the Westvleteren 12, but they can't find it anywhere near them. Texas, for instance, isn't included in the release, reportedly owing to its laws governing beer imports. For anyone in that situation, the Beer Advocate site has a list of possible substitutes, in its ratings of top quadrupel beers.
Erin Kulick can see the animal clinic where she once worked from her balcony in Queens, N.Y. Six weeks after Hurricane Sandy, the clinic is still closed., Erin Kulick can see the animal clinic where she once worked from her balcony in Queens, N.Y. Six weeks after Hurricane Sandy, the clinic is still closed., Hurricane Sandy's effect on the nation's unemployment figures was less pronounced than expected. The reasons are complex, but one thing is clear: Thousands of victims are still struggling to rebuild their lives and get back to work., Danielle Siekierski was tending bar at a restaurant in Manhattan's Meatpacking District before Sandy hit. When the restaurant was damaged in the storm, the workers were told it might be a week before it reopened., Two weeks later, it closed for good. Siekierski says the restaurant's finances were already shaky, and Sandy was the nail in the coffin., 'It's Beating Me Down', Now Siekierski is on the hunt for work. Every day she gets up, goes on the Internet and sends out resumes often applying for 10 or 20 jobs in a day. She's had no luck, she says, and it's beating me down., She tries to go to several interviews a day, but that has also been discouraging. At her most recent interview, there were 30 people in the room when she arrived. Knowing the window for interviews was short, Siekierski left. I know that by the time I get in there and I wait, they will cut it off at [7 p.m.] and no one is going to even speak with me, she says., Siekierski has applied for unemployment insurance through funds targeted for people laid off because of the storm. The money hasn't come through yet, but it will be only a drop in the bucket when it does. It's $180, Siekierski says. I live in downtown. $1,300 rent. That doesn't cover it., Manhattan, where Siekierski lives, seems much recovered on the surface. But near the JFK airport over in Howard Beach, Queens, the effects of Sandy are still visible everywhere. There are Dumpsters filled with Sheetrock and stacks of broken wood in front of many houses., One Week Becomes Six, Erin Kulick, a veterinarian, chose to work at the Howard Beach Animal Clinic because she loved the people but also because the clinic is very close to her home. Pointing it out from her balcony, she notes its missing siding., At first, Kulick, less than three years out of vet school, was optimistic after the storm. Staff cleaned up the clinic and ferried animals to heated shelters nearby. The head of the clinic told the staff to take a week or two off, but two weeks later, the power was still out., There was no way you could practice, Kulick says, And you were starting to get mold issues. At three weeks, her situation was getting dire. I just couldn't afford to be unemployed that long, she says., The clinic's owner is trying to get it back up and running, but Kulick says all five associate veterinarians have their resumes out. Kulick was lucky, as she and her husband had some savings and she is getting unemployment insurance., But the couple had to spend their savings to replace their cars, both destroyed in the storm. Finding a rental car in the interim took days, and having to care for their dog made things even more difficult., An Uncertain Holiday Season, But cars are nothing, Kulick says. Job uncertainty sucks. On the flip side, she says, her neighbors have been great. I have never been so close to my community., And yet, there are moments when Kulick feels survivor's guilt. So many people have it worse, she says. There are still people with no heat., Both Siekierski and Kulick have family out of state, but neither is sure she will make it home for Christmas. I've never missed a Christmas, but I feel I can't really leave, Siekierski says. Because if I do, how can I start a job?, Various government agencies have their own yardsticks to measure Sandy's impact on employment. But the personal stories are many and they are not going away.
The Federal Reserve's headquarters in Washington, D.C., The Federal Reserve's headquarters in Washington, D.C., Saying it is concerned that the economy won't be strong enough in coming months to keep adding jobs to the labor market, the Federal Reserve announced this afternoon that is increasing its efforts to give the economy a boost., And in an unusually specific statement from the central bank, its policymakers said they expect to keep a key short-term interest rate at or near zero percent as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6.5 percent., In November, the jobless rate was 7.7 percent., Reuters sums up the steps the Fed said it will take this way:, The central bank replaced a more modest stimulus program due to expire at year-end with a fresh round of Treasury purchases that will increase its balance sheet. It committed to monthly purchases of $45 billion in Treasuries on top of the $40 billion per month in mortgage-backed bonds it started buying in September., The New York Times sums up what the Fed's trying do:, The Fed's asset purchases are akin to removing seats from a game of musical chairs. Would-be investors in Treasuries and mortgage bonds are forced to compete for the remaining supply by accepting lower interest rates that is, they are forced to pay upfront a larger share of the money they are entitled to receive as the bond matures., And lower rates, in theory, are good for the economy if they lower the cost of borrowing and then stimulate spending and investment., Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke is due to take questions from reporters later this afternoon.
September 2012: Employees celebrate the opening of a Best Price Modern store in Hyderabad, India. Bharti Enterprises manages that and other such stores, which Wal-Mart has invested in., September 2012: Employees celebrate the opening of a Best Price Modern store in Hyderabad, India. Bharti Enterprises manages that and other such stores, which Wal-Mart has invested in., India's government has approved an inquiry into Wal-Mart's lobbying activities in the U.S. as a heated debate over the retail giant's plans for stores in India moves into a new phase, NPR's Julie McCarthy tells us from New Delhi., The company has been at the heart of noisy disruptions in the Indian parliament. Last week, the government cleared the way for the chain to open stores in India. But opponents have tried to stir suspicions by conflating Wal-Mart's lobbying in the U.S. with bribery of officials in India., So now, a retired judge has been appointed to investigate the retailer's lobbying activities., Wal-Mart, as The Financial Times reports, has said it spent $25 million over the past four years lobbying the U.S. government on issues including market access for investment in India. Wal-Mart has issued a statement saying that any allegation that a routine U.S. lobbying disclosure form reflects improper conduct in India is false., American Ambassader Nancy Powell has joined the discussion, saying that in the U.S., bribery and lobbying are two separate things., Though Wal-Mart's disclosures have generated political heat, the captains of India's own industries are no strangers to lobbying in America. Records filed with the U.S. House of Representatives show that some of India's most successful companies including Reliance Industries and Tata Sons, have contracted with American lobbying firms to promote their business interests., Wal-Mart was already being investigated in India, as the FT explains, over accusations that it secretly invested in supermarkets, flouting a ban on foreign direct investment in the sector. It invested in Easyday stores, a chain of convenience shops and hypermarkets that are managed by a partner, Bharti Enterprises.
A model at the front entrance to the Abercrombie &amp; Fitch flagship store in New York City., A model at the front entrance to the Abercrombie &amp; Fitch flagship store in New York City., Every day I walk down Fifth Avenue on my way to work. I pass glittering holiday store windows, the Salvation Army ringing its bells and the sparkling tree at Rockefeller Center., But for months I've noticed a mystery: Only one store has huge lines outside before it opens: Abercrombie &amp; Fitch., Perhaps 90 people stand on line every day before opening, rain or shine. It's been going on for years and not just during this season., It didn't make sense; you can find the store in almost any mall. So one day, I began asking people on the line where they were from: not one was from the United States., They were from Hungary, England, Ireland, Israel, Switzerland, France, you name it. And they hadn't come because of the male models in the store nude from the waist up although a woman from the U.K. laughed and said, of course it helps!, I finally did some research. It turns out, the company has spent millions on a huge marketing campaign in Europe but there are only a few stores there. So the New York store has become a beacon for every foreign tourist., Who knew? Mystery solved., (Margot Adler is a national desk correspondent based in New York.)
Two bag tags that may soon be together a lot., Two bag tags that may soon be together a lot., Looking to grab more of the lucrative New York-to-London market, Delta Air Lines said today that it plans to spend $360 million for a 49 percent stake in Virgin Atlantic., As USA Today writes:, The deal would give Delta greater appeal to premium-paying passengers doing business across the Atlantic. 'There's no question the whole focus of this deal ... was helping Delta get more access to London,' said travel analyst Henry Harteveldt. 'It's the most important international business market outside North America.' , According to The Wall Street Journal, Delta's deal with Virgin will enable its passengers to connect to Virgin's long-haul routes out of London and take advantage of some new domestic short-haul flights the U.K. carrier plans to add next year., The New York Times adds that Delta and Virgin Atlantic said they would apply for antitrust immunity from American and European competition authorities in order to coordinate fares and flight schedules, as well as offer seats on each other's planes., It's not easy to get more landing and takeoff rights at London's Heathrow Airport, as the Times notes:, British Airways dominates Heathrow, with 53 percent of the slots, followed by Lufthansa of Germany, with 5.6 percent, and Virgin with 3.3 percent. American and United each have 2.3 percent. British Airways' hold on the airport actually increased in the last year after it completed the acquisition of British Midland International from Lufthansa., The Delta-Virgin deal will need to get OKs from U.S. and European aviation regulators.
As weary as many Americans grew of campaign commercials last month, they may be getting even more annoyed this month by endless talk of the fiscal cliff, the massive collection of tax increases and spending cuts set to take effect at year's end., It's easy to understand the urge to stick fingers in ears and loudly chant la-la-la-la. The budget problems are indeed complicated, and the negotiations tedious., But resolving the mess is extremely important: Without a solution, every person who gets a paycheck or has investments will see his or her taxes rise., And if the stalemate were to linger deep into the new year, many people could see their jobs disappear. The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office says that if President Obama and lawmakers fail to reach an agreement, the U.S. unemployment rate later in 2013 could rise to 9 percent, from the current 7.7 percent., Many economists say that might trigger a new recession sometime next year. And that, in turn, could hurt the whole global economy as our trading partners start to feel the contraction., Of course, both the White House and Congress say they have every intention of reaching some kind of agreement. In fact, the House of Representatives was formally scheduled to go home for the year this week, but Majority Leader Eric Cantor, R-Va., announced that the House will not adjourn the 112th Congress until a credible solution to the fiscal cliff has been found., But what if no deal is struck?, Here is a timeline of the changes that in the absence of any action by the president and Congress would start to take effect early in the new year:, Income tax rates rise for virtually all Americans. The 2012 individual marginal rates of 10, 15, 28, 33 and 35 percent revert to the pre-Bush-era levels of 15, 25, 28, 36 and 39.6 percent., The withholding rate on the payroll tax that finances Social Security reverts to 6.2 percent from the current reduced rate of 4.2 percent for the first $110,110 of a worker's salary. The Wall Street Journal notes: For someone earning the 2011 median income of $50,054 that translates into $1,001.08 a year or about $40 less in a biweekly paycheck. The tax holiday had been in effect for two years., The estate tax rises to 55 percent for an inherited estate worth more than $1 million. In 2012, it's 35 percent and only applies to inheritances exceeding $5 million., The tax on dividends more than doubles from 15 percent to 39.6 percent., The tax on capital gains rises to depending on income somewhere between 10 and 20 percent, from a range of 5 to 15 percent in 2012., About 2 million Americans lose unemployment checks as long-term unemployment extensions expire., Payment to physicians treating Medicare patients are cut 27 percent as annual doc fix expires. Congress routinely creates a fix to adjust physician reimbursements to something close to the going rate for medical service, rather than a 1997 reimbursement formula., $109 billion in spending cuts for 2013 begin to take effect. Half the cuts must come from the Pentagon budget; half from other discretionary spending., The 113th Congress convenes., President Obama's second inauguration, a day after a private swearing-in. The president's inaugural committee is accepting corporate donations, unlike four years ago, to help pay for the events., Congressional action is needed to raise the nation's debt limit. The U.S is likely to exceed the $16.394 trillion debt ceiling near the end of December 2012, according to the Treasury Department. But Treasury steps will let it continue funding the government until mid-February or early March, the Congressional Budget Office projects., Funding of the federal government ends with the expiration of the fiscal 2013 continuing resolution., Twenty-seven million taxpayers will have to pay the alternative minimum tax for tax year 2012. And that will delay filing dates and refunds because the IRS will have to reprogram its computers to deal with the lack of a patch., The AMT was created in 1969 to ensure some income tax for wealthy people who might otherwise use tax breaks to avoid any liability. But Congress did not include an inflation escalator, and so uses patches to make sure it hits about 5 million upper-middle-class households. Absent a new patch, the AMT will apply to nearly half of people with incomes of $75,000 to $100,000, who could pay an average of $3,700 more in taxes for 2012., According to the Congressional Research Service:, 907,000 related to the Defense Department, CRS notes, citing a University of Maryland study., 80,500 Education Department and Head Start jobs, CRS says, citing a National Education Association study., Between 66,000 and 132,000 aerospace jobs, many of them in the Federal Aviation Administration, CRS reports, citing the Aerospace Industries Association., 33,700 jobs related to the National Institutes of Health, CRS says, citing a United for Medical Research report., 500,000 fewer jobs related to the Social Security Administration and Medicare: 212,000 were direct jobs (in occupations such as nurses, housekeepers, independent contractors and medical residents), CRS reports, citing the American Hospital Association, American Medical Association and American Nurses Association., Researchers Sarah Knight and Lauren Work contributed to this report.
Lines of communication remain open in an effort to avert the automatic tax hikes and spending cuts known as the fiscal cliff, according to the White House and House Speaker John Boehner., If no deal is reached between now and the end of the year, would the consequences be that drastic?, To answer that question, let's imagine it's January and the nation has gone off the fiscal cliff. You don't really feel any different and things don't look different, either. That's because, according to former congressional budget staffer Stan Collender, the cliff isn't really a cliff., It was a great communications tool, but it was a misnomer from the beginning, says Collender, who now works at Qorvis Communications. The idea of jumping off the cliff and just having the economy go into the tanks immediately is just absolutely, positively, incontrovertibly incorrect., Yes, taxes technically will go up on Jan. 1. And yes, federal spending will be cut on Jan. 2, but you really won't start to see any real effects of that for a couple of weeks at the minimum and maybe not even until the end of the month, he adds., He says the Obama administration would most likely instruct departments to delay the cuts for a little while to see if something can be worked out with Congress., But what about taxes?, For most people, it's life goes on, says Bob Meighan, vice president of TurboTax, the program some 25 million people use to prepare their taxes each year., We may see take-home pay reduced to accommodate the increased tax withholding on your paycheck, as well as the additional payroll taxes. But there is already talk of deferring or delaying that until Congress decides what to do, Meighan says., Even if higher payroll taxes and income tax rates show up in that very first paycheck, for most it won't arrive until midmonth, says Edward Kleinbard, a tax law professor at the University of Southern California., The first few days of 2013 are not going to radically change his or her life, but as the weeks go by, at some point, take-home pay will go down noticeably, Kleinbard says., The Congressional Budget Office has said that if the automatic tax hikes and spending cuts of the fiscal cliff are allowed to happen, the country would fall into recession in 2013. But budget maven Collender says it wouldn't be immediate., It's not as if the entire increase in taxes that would be included in the fiscal cliff would be taken out of your first paycheck. The real problem economically with the fiscal cliff is cumulative. That is, if we hit the cliff, we go over it and it stays in effect for the whole year, Collender says., He adds that the thing to look for immediately would be market reaction a dive in stock prices., But Jack Ablin, chief investment officer at BMO Private Bank in Chicago, isn't so sure that will happen., There's a changing perception that this is no longer a time bomb that will detonate, Ablin says., He thinks that perception is already baked into stock prices. The imagery Ablin prefers to a cliff or a bomb is a pot of water. On Jan. 1, the burner is turned on, but the water won't start boiling for a while., Put it this way: I lose sleep at night so my clients don't have to, Ablin says. I'm not losing a ton of sleep over this one at least not yet. I start losing sleep if we are making no progress by, let's say, the end of January., So, if these guys are right, and there is no deal by the end of December, go ahead and enjoy your New Year's Eve. It would take awhile for the real consequences to play out.
Thousands rally at the state capitol grounds in Lansing, Mich., on Tuesday. The crowd is protesting right-to-work legislation., Thousands rally at the state capitol grounds in Lansing, Mich., on Tuesday. The crowd is protesting right-to-work legislation., Michigan's Legislature is expected to pass legislation Tuesday that would bar contracts requiring employees to pay union dues as a condition of employment. The proposed right-to-work law has infuriated union leaders in a state considered the heart of the union movement., Republican leaders pushing the bill closely watched the fights over labor rights going on across the Midwest, but it wasn't Ohio or Wisconsin that prompted them into action. Many leaders in the public and private sector looked to their neighbor to the immediate south., A right-to-work protester walks past Michigan state police at the capitol in Lansing on Tuesday. The Michigan Legislature is expected to pass legislation Tuesday that would bar contracts requiring employees to pay union dues as a condition of employment., A right-to-work protester walks past Michigan state police at the capitol in Lansing on Tuesday. The Michigan Legislature is expected to pass legislation Tuesday that would bar contracts requiring employees to pay union dues as a condition of employment., Our members tell us routinely that they are aggressively recruited to other states, most notably freedom-to-work states like Indiana, says Jim Holcomb of the Michigan Chamber of Commerce., Holcomb says his members have been worried about watching jobs go across the border to Indiana since that state became a right-to-work one., Absolutely there's an immediate nature to this, and the positive impact as soon as this bill goes into effect is now we're at least starting on equal footing with those other states and we can sell all the benefits of Michigan, says Holcomb., Legislators and business leaders in smaller industries and in the western part of the state away from the auto industry have pushed the hardest for right-to-work. Chrysler, Ford and General Motors have stayed out of the fight., I don't think that they see, well, if this is right-to-work then we are going to start investing more here. It's not that big of an issue for the Detroit Three that are already unionized, says Kristin Dziczek of the Center for Automotive Research., The legislation covers both private and public sector workers. On Tuesday, thousands of union members are converging on Lansing, the capital., Labor leaders had been watching the battles in Wisconsin and Ohio, and that's why during the November election they put a measure on the ballot that would have enshrined collective bargaining rights into the state's constitution., Organized labor took that risk, in putting the issue on the ballot, that they would win. They did not win. They got clobbered, says Bill Ballenger, who publishes the newsletter Inside Michigan Politics. Some would argue that they kind of brought this on themselves because they emboldened the people in the Legislature who were most eager to pass right-to-work. The Republicans felt, 'OK, this is it. The window is closing. Now is the time. If we don't do it now, we're probably never going to get this done.' , Republicans in the statehouse will lose members in January, and they wouldn't have had the guaranteed votes to pass the legislation then., Ballenger says Republicans in Michigan have learned another key lesson from their fellow Midwesterners: changing the recall statute language in the state to make it tougher to recall legislators., Leaders of organized labor are vowing to fight not just today, but in the future as well. They acknowledge that they may have to wait until 2014 for any resolution. That's when the entire Legislature and the governor are up for re-election.
Detroit Mayor Dave Bing delivers his State of the City address on March 7. If Bing and the City Council can't agree on a plan to reduce the city's budget deficit, state officials are poised to take away their power over Detroit's finances., Detroit Mayor Dave Bing delivers his State of the City address on March 7. If Bing and the City Council can't agree on a plan to reduce the city's budget deficit, state officials are poised to take away their power over Detroit's finances., Detroit officials face a tough vote Tuesday as they try to keep their city from going over its own fiscal cliff. If the mayor and City Council cannot agree on a plan to reduce the city's budget deficit, state officials are poised to take away their power and assume total control over Detroit's finances., It's been a continuing vicious cycle: Detroit's population exodus, lost tax revenue and chronic mismanagement have left the city burning through cash to the point where the state of Michigan has to provide funding to help the city meet payroll for the next few months., At Detroit's Butzel Family Center, the situation has Sean Hendricks shooting a nervous game of pool. He knows the city has to cut costs and maybe even close this recreation center. But he says he hopes it doesn't., A lot of seniors go to these places, especially in the summertime, he says. When it's hot out, he says, They can come in the center and stay for a little while and keep cool. Everything's falling down little by little., Moody's Investors Service, the rating agency, recently lowered Detroit's rating well below junk status; the city now faces at least a $40 million budget shortfall., Michigan State Treasurer Andy Dillon says it's likely the only real option is to appoint an emergency financial manager with sweeping powers to gut contracts and sell assets., The cash situation is going to be very difficult for the city to reverse, he says. I think that they've gotten so far down the path that you're just not going to find a big cash solution here quickly., The state already controls the finances in nearby cities like Flint and Pontiac., But Detroit Mayor Dave Bing sees a way out. He wants the City Council to pass a number of proposals, including the elimination of roughly 5 percent of the total workforce. Bing is clearly frustrated with his council., I've taken things to City Council over time, and they have not been able to respond as fast as I would like them to so that we can start the implementation plan, he says., But the council's second in command, Gary Brown, says the mayor has it all wrong. He says the city is bleeding money because Bing has been reluctant to cut deeply., The council asked the mayor to cut the budget for the last two years $100 million each year and he refused to do it, Brown says. And until we have the political will, we're going to be in this situation and have an emergency manager come in a dictator where the mayor doesn't have a function, the council doesn't have a function, there's just one person calling the shots., With city government essentially gridlocked, and the deficit deepening, residents' frustration continues to mount., At a recent council meeting, Marine Corps veteran David Malikun-Muqaribu is among an overflow crowd in the hallway outside chambers, shut out from discussions over privatizing 80 percent of Detroit's water department., I spent a year in Iraq and I did tours overseas in other theaters, and I'm genuinely blown away to see that I wasted four years of my life to defend democracy only to come back to the city that I'm from to see democracy totally eviscerated, he says., No matter who ultimately controls the city's finances, one thing all sides agree on is that massive cuts to Detroit's programs and services are coming even if the city eventually files for bankruptcy protection.
In a statement on Monday, the U.S. Treasury Department said it will launch an underwritten public offering to sell its remaining 234,169,156 common stock shares in insurer American International Group Inc., better known as AIG., The U.S. government bought the controlling stake in the company as part of the $182 billion bank bailout in 2008. The sale would bring an end to the government's run as the company's largest shareholder, which represented a 16-percent ownership in the company., The government originally said it didn't expect to recoup the money from the bailout, but AIG promised it would it would repay. A restructuring and a return to solvency by AIG returned the government's investment as well as a profit., The AP reports that as of September, the Treasury and Federal Reserve had received back $197.4 billion., AIG's Monday closing price of $33.36 would value these remaining shares at about $7.8 billion., Forbes had this additional analysis:, With visibility on two uncertain elements, and with the opportunity to exit its equity stake before year-end, the time is right for the Treasury to close out its AIG position in the offering to be conducted by Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Citigroup, Deutsche Bank Securities, Goldman Sachs Group and JPMorgan Chase. Treasury will still hold warrants to purchase AIG shares issued as part of the insurer's bailout., AIG shares fell 1.4 percent in after-hours trading, similar to a dip in September when the Treasury announced it was looking to sell its remaining shares in the company., As Eyder reported at the time, it is said that the government needs to get more than $28.73 per share to break even on this portion of the bailout.
The $1.9 billion settlement from British banking firm HSBC will settle allegations of allowing money laundering and transfers of billions from Iran., The $1.9 billion settlement from British banking firm HSBC will settle allegations of allowing money laundering and transfers of billions from Iran., Update at 7 a.m. ET, Dec. 11. Settlement Announced:, Saying that we accept responsibility for our past mistakes, the chief executive of Britain's HSBC has confirmed that the banking giant will pay a record $1.9 billion to settle charges related to a money laundering scheme in the U.S., We have said we are profoundly sorry for them, and we do so again, HSBC Group Chief Executive Stuart Gulliver says in a statement released Tuesday morning. The HSBC of today is a fundamentally different organization from the one that made those mistakes., As The Associated Press writes, the probe of the bank Europe's largest by market value has focused on the transfer of billions of dollars on behalf of nations like Iran, which are under international sanctions, and the transfer of money through the U.S. financial system from Mexican drug cartels., The Wall Street Journal adds that HSBC expects to announce a similar agreement with U.K. authorities soon. The Journal reports that:, Many of the HSBC money-laundering problems centered on bulk-cash, U.S. dollar transactions between HSBC's Mexico and U.S. units. The transactions were detailed in a U.S. Senate investigative report published this past summer., The report by the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations detailed a regulatory culture at HSBC that shocked even its own employees, according to testimony provided to the committee and at a hearing., NPR's Jim Zarroli added on Morning Edition that HSBC is not the only foreign bank to be accused of money laundering in recent months. Monday, Britain's Standard Chartered agreed to pay $327 million to settle charges that it helped Iran and other countries evade U.S. sanctions., Jim Zarroli on 'Morning Edition', Our original post:, Federal and state authorities will announce a record $1.9 billion settlement with British banking firm HSBC on Tuesday, NPR has confirmed with a source familiar with the settlement., The deal will settle allegations that HSBC ignored red flags of massive money laundering by Mexican drug cartels and allowed transfers of billions of dollars from nations like Iran and Sudan, which are under U.S. sanctions., Along with forfeiting $1.3 billion, according to The Wall Street Journal, the bank will also pay a civil fine of $650 million. The settlement will also resolve other investigations by the Justice Department, the Treasury Department and other federal agencies., According to the news reports, as part of the deal the bank will also admit to violating the Bank Secrecy Act and the Trading with the Enemy Act., Back in July, HSBC's head of group compliance, David Bagley, resigned in the middle of a Senate hearing looking into the case., On Monday, federal authorities also announced that another British bank, Standard Chartered, agreed to a settlement of $327 million over allegations it had funneled money for Iranian and Sudanese clients through American subsidiaries.
Jenny Adams in the Wayland Bar in Alphabet City, where she stored piles of relief supplies to distribute. Adams raised $10,000 through a crowdfunding website to help her neighbors affected by Hurricane Sandy., Jenny Adams in the Wayland Bar in Alphabet City, where she stored piles of relief supplies to distribute. Adams raised $10,000 through a crowdfunding website to help her neighbors affected by Hurricane Sandy., Big-hearted Americans always rush to give money after a disaster. Just how much and how fast is often determined by technology. After the earthquake in Haiti, texting small donations, for example, became a new standard practice., This time around, Hurricane Sandy has shown crowdfunding websites are a simple tool for quick-response giving. Anyone can go on these sites and ask for money to rebuild or to help their neighbors rebuild. Friends, family and strangers chip in., You can literally sign up, share your campaign on Facebook, Twitter, email, and begin accepting credit or debit card donations online in under a minute, says Brad Damphousse, the founder of the crowdfunding website GoFundMe., That's what 32-year-old writer Jenny Adams did. It was simple: she added a gripping picture of a flooded street to her page, and asked for money that she could give out to her neighbors affected by Sandy in the Alphabet City neighborhood of Manhattan., There were certainly people who gave me a fair amount of money that I have never met and don't know, Adams says., People usually use sites like GoFundMe to tactfully ask loved ones for help with medical bills or expensive life events, like buying an engagement ring. Spending disaster donations, however, is trickier than cutting one big check. Adams has no formal training in relief work, so it quickly became a thoughtful scramble to spend the money., White House To Seek Emergency Sandy Funds, People are like 'What? You're just going to give me $500?' And I'm like, 'Yeah, I'm just going to give you $500,' she says., Adams bought bundles of jackets, blankets and food at Kmart and Target, and offered them to neighbors in need., She also handed out a lot of money. She gave $500 to a friend who owns a damaged bar. A $200 gift card went to the checkout lady at Kmart for her sister in N.J. And Adams recently offered a $1,000 check to the damaged Lower East Side Girls Club., Adams relies on her judgment she gives whatever seems like a good use of money. Ken Berger, on the other hand, prefers a more methodical and measured approach. He's the CEO of Charity Navigator, a giving watchdog group that recommends donating to known charities. He's a bit hard on crowdfunding., It's virtually impossible to measure these little efforts because they have no data, track record, filings of any kind, Berger says, and so the ability to objectively assess them is near impossible., He says you should donate only to people you know and trust. Jennifer Elwood, executive director of consumer marketing at the American Red Cross, agrees with that line of thought and says everyone should help, even if that means not giving to formal charities like the Red Cross., It's really up to everyone who wants to help in their own individual way, she says. Whether that's through us, or through another organization, or an individual in their community, we're absolutely supportive of that., Want To Help Sandy Victims? Send Cash, Not Clothes, The Red Cross is embracing crowdfunding with Sandy campaigns of its own on two different websites, IndieGoGo and CrowdRise. Each site is pulling in more than $1 million, which is a pittance compared to the $170 million in total donations to the charity. The organization says it will have more than half of it left for long-term Sandy rebuilding., Elwood says the Red Cross has the resources to stick around and continue donating. Solo fundraisers like Jenny Adams, however, tend to run on shorter fuel., I think if we had a hurricane again tomorrow, though, I might take a break, Adams says with a laugh.
1 of 11, The Orange Country Register in suburban Los Angeles is expanding its newsroom. Not only that the owners are emphasizing print, not digital., In the past few weeks, longtime Register editor Ken Brusic has hired some two-dozen positions: critics to review food, TV and cars, a society columnist and investigative reporters. He's still looking for a movie critic, a magazine writer and many more reporters., We haven't seen this kind of hiring since the early '90s, he says. That was before the digital age, when newspapers were still hugely profitable., At the Register's headquarters, it sounds like a different era. The Register's presses whir nearly 24 hours a day., They're printing more color, more pages: double the editorial section, two weekly high school sports sections and a new daily business section., Brusic doesn't think people stopped subscribing to newspapers because they didn't want to read them. He thinks it's because publishers made too many cutbacks., They've been offering less and attempting, in some cases, to charge more for it. And people are smart. People won't put up for that sort of thing, he says. So we're now offering more., The Financial Puzzle, Brusic has been at the Register for more than two decades, much of which was marked by big layoffs., Three years ago, the paper went into bankruptcy, but the changing economics of the industry were only part of the problem. The owners had saddled the paper with hundreds of millions in debt, and then cashed out., Murdoch's News Corp. Shuts Down 'The Daily', So there was no reason to think things would be different when a Boston-based investment firm bought the Register this summer for an undisclosed price. The firm's CEO, 39-year-old Aaron Kushner, came to the paper after running a greeting card company., I'm not a media guru. I didn't grow up in the business, he says., Speaking in his spacious, barely moved-in office, Kushner says his team's lack of newspaper experience could lead to a sense of optimism., Perhaps we would have had a harder time maintaining that optimism if we had gone through everything that major newspapers have been through, he says., Since Kushner took over as publisher, the Register website has cut back on blogs. A paywall is on the way., He says he has nothing against digital. It's just that for the foreseeable future, most paying subscribers buy the printed product. Plus, he's seeing his advertisers decrease their online spending., When you see very smart people like Kohl's or J.C. Penney who are actively reducing what they are doing digitally in order to do more in print, they're not doing it because it's trendy, he says. They're doing it because it's valuable and it works. , An 'Interesting Experiment', Rick Edmonds, media business analyst at the Poynter Institute, agrees that advertisers are having second thoughts about digital. The problem is that print advertising isn't doing any better., The print numbers have continued, at most papers, falling something like 8 percent year to year, he says. , Given that, Edmonds says, the Register's plan to expand its printed product is risky., I'd put it in the category of interesting experiment. It's not what most people are doing, he says., But Kushner isn't interested in what most people are doing. The publisher not only wants to prove his print-first model can work in Orange County; he now has his sights set an hour north, on a bigger paper., We might be able to try and turn the fortunes of the L.A. Times to the point where it's growing on a similar trajectory as the Register, he says., That's a long way down the road, Kushner cautions, as is the ability to judge whether his model at the Register is a success., But early indications are positive. Circulation numbers are up slightly, which is good news for a paper that used to see double-digit declines.
With major tax changes still undecided, accountants and other financial professionals must advise their clients on various possible scenarios., With major tax changes still undecided, accountants and other financial professionals must advise their clients on various possible scenarios., The expiration of Bush-era tax cuts. A patch to the alternative minimum tax. An increase in capital gains taxes., As the fiscal cliff approaches, all of these are possible, but none certain. That uncertainty solicits many questions from anxious taxpayers. But, for accountants and financial planners, there are a few definitive answers., Financial professionals who spoke with NPR say they are not strangers to uncertainty. When the Bush tax cuts were up for expiration two years ago, for instance, the feeling was similar., Every time there's a significant change in tax law, you have to retool and learn things, says Mark Burger, a CPA in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., But the fiscal cliff, with its host of associated changes, presents a challenge unlike anything the pros have dealt with in the past., The difference this year is the volume and the unprecedented amount of issues coming at the same time, says Ed Karl, vice president of taxation of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants., Clients, they say, crave certainty. Although they can't provide that, professionals say, they can be honest about what they don't know, and help their clients prepare for possible futures., Our job is to make clients aware of these issues and be in a position to act when these rules become final, says Daniel Joss, a financial planner in Reston, Va., One thing they can do, Karl says, is to work with clients on scenario planning., In other words, 'Let's talk about your situation. If this happens or doesn't happen politically, then we should do this, or I recommend you do this.' So when you get to [Dec. 21 or Dec. 22], which is when we're guessing there will be a clearer picture of what might happen, you'll be in a better position to make decisions from a planning perspective, Karl says., For one, clients wonder whether they should they sell their assets before year end in anticipation of possible capital gains tax increases in 2013., It doesn't make sense if you weren't at all thinking of selling stocks or assets, Karl says. But if you were thinking about selling it now or within the next couple of months you clearly need to do some serious thinking about accelerating the sale of that business or particular assets into this year., Of course, accountants can't say for sure that the taxes will go up. But they might. So consider it, they say., Uncertainty about tax rates, meanwhile, has effectively caused accountants to turn some traditional advice on its head., Normally at the end of the year you're thinking of deferring income to the next year and accelerating expenses into the current year. This year you're probably looking at the reverse of taking income earlier into this year where the rates and the preferential rates are almost certain to change next year, Karl says., But not everything is up in the air., After Jan. 1, for instance, the record-high exemption for estates and gifts is expected to drop to $1 million from $5.12 million. For people with lots of money to give, it may be time to make that transaction., The Associated Press reports that financial advisers and trust and estate attorneys have been flooded with requests from those who wish to make financial gifts and create trusts. Joss, the financial planner, says he has handled such requests., We're saying to our wealthier clients, 'If you're planning to give more than a million dollars away to the next generation, you may want to do that this year instead of waiting to see what may happen next year. Not everyone can afford to give gifts, but with the top 1 percent, they'd much rather give this year when they're allowed to give more than next year, Joss says., He says he's also helping clients avoid the 3.8 percent tax increase associated with the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, that takes effect in 2013. The increase will apply to investment income for single taxpayers with adjusted gross income above $200,000 or jointly filing married couples making more than $250,000. Taxpayers can avoid the tax by realizing taxable gains before the end of the year., There's a similar sense of urgency for big charitable contributions, The Wall Street Journal reports. Fears of a threat to the charitable deduction have caused wealthy taxpayers to scramble to make donations before the end of the year., But taxpayers aren't the only ones holding their breath. The IRS is already bracing itself for the worst., In a letter to members of Congress, IRS Acting Commissioner Steven T. Miller said that the Internal Revenue Service annually conducts planning during the summer to prepare for the upcoming filing season, but that planning this year has been particularly challenging due to unresolved tax issues., When Congress takes action well after this planning process is under way, there is potential for substantial disruption to the filing season ahead, Miller wrote., Expiration of the alternative minimum tax patch, for instance, would require systems changes that would require a significant amount of time. This could delay tax filing until March, and in turn, delay refunds.
General Electric's Appliance Park has been in Louisville, Ky., since 1951. But it's putting new power behind its U.S. production., General Electric's Appliance Park has been in Louisville, Ky., since 1951. But it's putting new power behind its U.S. production., The advantages to making products in the U.S. are starting to stack up and companies are taking notice. Among them are Apple, which announced Thursday it plans to start producing some of its Mac computers here instead of in China, and General Electric, which is making big investments at home., It's not just a matter of publicity, either. As the December issue of The Atlantic reports, companies are seeing real economic advantages to insourcing, a reversal of the outsourcing trends that sent U.S. manufacturing overseas., A New Approach, General Electric opened Appliance Park in Louisville, Ky., in 1951, but lately it has been making some changes there. In August, the company announced an $800 million investment in jobs, products and the manufacturing process itself., Back in 2008, Rich Calvaruso gathered his team at Appliance Park and told them they had to rethink the dishwasher. As a Lean leader, Calvaruso's job is to figure out how to make things more efficiently. So he asked a team of factory workers, designers and marketers to put their heads together. They managed to cut down the time it takes to build the dishwasher by one-third., The dishwasher's orientation was the key. When it was set up a certain way, operators down the line could do their work without spending time manipulating the washer itself., Even though it now takes fewer people to make that dishwasher, not a single person was laid off. Calvaruso tells Guy Raz, host of weekends on All Things Considered, that those employees were freed up to work in other parts of the company., As Heard On Weekends On 'All Things Considered', Entrepreneur Bayard Winthrop says his hoodies are the best in the world, and that he's making money making them in the U.S., He opened his clothing business, American Giant, in San Francisco in February. He has 10 people in front office and up to 150 in manufacturing, where his entire line soup to nuts is made in America., The business was featured in an article in Slate on Tuesday. Two days after that article was published, they were practically sold out, he tells Guy Raz, host of weekends on All Things Considered., So what makes them so special? As noted in Slate, they aren't cheap. A basic sweatshirt is $59. But Winthrop says the secret is in the details from the fabric to the draw strings, making sure that each one of those elements of the sweatshirt gets a lot of attention., But they're still making a profit, in part because they've cut out the distribution costs by selling solely online. Winthrop says staying close to the consumer and the manufacturer was the unlock., And that gives us ... a lot more investment opportunity to put back into product and service, he says., Winthrop is also confident they'll be able to scale up production as the business grows., I think there's an awful lot of chatter in the media about the death of American manufacturing. I think we're finding almost exactly the opposite, he says, that the manufacturing facilities that have made it through the last 30 years which no doubt have been difficult have come out the far side stronger and more efficient, with phenomenal people, talented people, efficient people., That process set in motion a company-wide re-evaluation of how GE should operate. The new philosophy was simple: It might make more business sense to have everyone involved in a product work in the same place. That thinking led to a change that couldn't have happened if some workers were in China, others in Mexico and some in the U.S., GE holds up another example of improved efficiency. The marketing team wanted to eliminate four visible screws to improve the dishwasher's design. A diverse group of workers found a way to do that, making the manufacturing process quicker as a result., With workers in different departments physically sharing the same space, Calvaruso says, these cross-interest conversations can happen more easily., Where's The Incentive?, Reporter Charles Fishman, who wrote about Appliance Park in the latest issue of The Atlantic, doesn't think it's a blip. He sees the four-screw story as a metaphor for this insourcing boomlet., To me the power of the four-screws story is no one ever would have known, in the old method, a year and a half ago, that anybody wanted the screws to disappear, he says, that they could have been made to disappear, that making the screws go away makes the door cheaper, easier to make and a better product., Fishman says companies are finally seeing the economic advantages of doing things differently., What I discovered is it's not clear this huge wave of outsourcing was done for really smart, rational business reasons, he says., Companies started moving jobs overseas when they calculated how much cheaper the labor was, Fishman says, but they weren't factoring in other kinds of costs., This stuff turns out to be really complicated, he says. And you have to sit down and ask a whole set of questions before you understand that you've been making a mistake for a year, or two years, or four years., One of those factors that businesses are starting to take into account is intellectual property, Fishman says. Specialized technology can make products more competitive, but if they're made overseas, it's easier for others to make knockoffs., Another incentive is energy prices, he says. Manufacturing in the U.S. cuts down on transportation costs. Plus, he says, the factories themselves can run on natural gas, which is cheaper in the U.S. , All of these variables put together make the difference, Fishman says., I don't think you can say just wages, or just energy prices, or just transportation time, he says. But when you stack them up, it really gets to be incredible., Re-Evaluting The Model, But U.S. manufacturing jobs aren't exactly erupting in a boom., There haven't been this few people working in factories in the United States since 1941. There were a third fewer people in the country then, Fishman says., However, the output of the workers that are in the industry is high., Because of the recession, we're not quite at the highest dollar value the country's ever produced in manufactured goods, but we're very close, he says., And as more companies like GE make big investments in U.S. manufacturing, others could start to follow., Fishman says the U.S. manufacturing industry won't ever look exactly like it used to, but that different kinds of manufacturing will start happening in different places. However, he says, the notion that the U.S. will never make anything again is dramatically overstated., I think smart companies will see it isn't an act of patriotism or charity, he says. It's smart business to make stuff here.
An empty container ship waited near the Port of Los Angeles during the eight-day strike by members of the International Longshore and Warehouse Union. The stoppage put a halt to most of the work at the Los Angeles and Long Beach ports., When clerical workers at the ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach reached an impasse in talks with management over job security last week, they took what has become something of a rare step: They went on strike., Once a mainstay of the labor arsenal, strikes have largely fallen off since the early 1980s. So a recent spate of high-profile work stoppages, including by Chicago teachers, nonunionized Wal-Mart workers and New York City fast-food employees, has some experts wondering if we're seeing a resurgence of the tactic., Thomas Kochan, co-director of the Sloan Institute for Work and Employment Research at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, thinks years of pent-up frustration over stagnant wages and diminishing benefits has finally hit the boiling point., Work stoppages have fallen off precipitously since the early 1980s, according to data from the Department of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics., Number of work stoppages involving 1,000 or more employees, 1961-2011, Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Stephanie d'Otreppe/NPR, Number (in thousands) of workers involved in those stoppages., Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Stephanie d'Otreppe/NPR, If you look at the national data, you see a decline in job satisfaction and you see tremendous frustration, particularly among younger workers who recognize they can't get the kinds of jobs they've been educated for, that they can't support their families or earn the kinds of incomes that their parents earned at comparable stages in life, he says., It's been years in the making and long held in check by higher unemployment, but you're going to see more of those pressures explode in different ways because the economy is getting better, but people don't necessarily feel it, Kochan says., Labor lawyer and author Thomas Geoghegan agrees things may have reached a tipping point. He credits the Occupy Wall Street movement with reminding labor that getting out in the streets and making a loud noise is an option., There are people who aren't ready to strike now, but they are paying close attention to see if this sort of thing works, he says. If it does, you're going to see more of it., Case in point: the Black Friday protests at Wal-Mart, which is known for its strong opposition to labor. Scores of employees at stores across the country, joined by an even greater number of activists, staged a one-day walkout on the big shopping day after Thanksgiving over what they see as low pay, lack of benefits and heavy-handed corporate tactics to prevent them from organizing. The retailer tried to prevent the union-backed demonstrations but failed., The Wal-Mart protests were an inspiration to many who manned the picket lines in Los Angeles and Long Beach, says Craig Merrilees, a spokesman for the International Longshore and Warehouse Union, the union that represents the striking port workers., It got so much media coverage and involved such a high-profile employer that it's hard to ignore them, he says., But with U.S. unemployment at 7.7 percent and concerns about corporate outsourcing not to mention Wisconsin's move against collective bargaining for most public employees, and Michigan lawmakers passing right to work legislation that would make paying union dues voluntary &mdash; is now the time for workers to walk off the job?, Chris Edwards, the director of tax policy studies at the libertarian-leaning Cato Institute, says no., The hypercompetitive economy makes it nearly impossible in the long run to squeeze employers, he says, adding, If you raise worker pay, it's just going to mean fewer jobs and benefits and more automation down the road., Over the same period, corporate profits have mostly risen even as inflation-adjusted wages have remained stagnant, according to Thomas Kochan of MIT's Sloan Institute for Work and Employment Research., Corporate profits after taxes and employee compensation, 1961-2012, Source: FRED Economic Data, Credit: Stephanie d'Otreppe/NPR, And Edwards notes that even a handful of workers can wreak havoc: It was a small group of clerical workers at the port of Los Angeles that cost billions of dollars in trade disruption., MIT's Kochan acknowledges that to strike is always a dangerous gamble. That's nothing new, he says, but the fact that there are fewer jobs out there makes it more risky, to be sure., He cites a weakening of penalties and enforcement mechanisms that protect workers since the 1980s as a primary reason why strikes and other labor actions are more perilous now than in the past., It's a theme echoed by the chief of staff at the country's largest labor organization. Jon Hiatt of the AFL-CIO says President Reagan's firing of 13,000 strikers belonging to the Professional Air Traffic Controllers Organization in 1981 was a watershed event in labor relations. The air-traffic controllers were in violation of federal law that banned strikes by government workers., I think PATCO was certainly an important event because it represented the de-stigmatization of anti-union activity in a really extreme way, Hiatt says., What followed was an erosion of labor protections during the Reagan administration. At the same time, there was an enormous outsourcing of jobs and technological advances that changed the whole nature of the workplace and made strikes a less effective tool, he says., But Hiatt feels a change in the winds., There are more and more signs of workers looking for some sort of coming together to improve conditions, he says. Even a few months ago, the notion that we would see [labor protests] in 100 Wal-Mart stores on a given day was hard to imagine.
Judy Smith, of Dalton, Ga., looks over paperwork as she files for unemployment benefits in August after being laid off from a catering job. More than 2 million people who get extended benefits may lose them if Congress doesn't act soon., Judy Smith, of Dalton, Ga., looks over paperwork as she files for unemployment benefits in August after being laid off from a catering job. More than 2 million people who get extended benefits may lose them if Congress doesn't act soon., The Labor Department's glad tidings Friday about the uptick in job creation last month might morph into bad news next month for many of the long-term unemployed., December 7, 2012, That's because the boost in November hiring, with employers adding 146,000 jobs, might make it more difficult for Democrats to argue in favor of having Congress renew the extension of benefits for people out of work more than six months., As things stand, four in 10 Americans who receive unemployment insurance will lose their extended benefits if federal aid expires as scheduled on Dec. 29., If that were to happen, it would be devastating for these unemployed workers and their families; in many cases, this is the only income they have, says Judy Conti, a lobbyist with National Employment Law Project, a group that advocates for low-wage workers. It's the middle of winter when people need heat and food and shelter., But conservatives now have a stronger argument to make when they say the job market is healthy enough to offer opportunities to those who have been out of work a long time. In November, the unemployment rate dropped two-tenths of a point to 7.7 percent, the lowest level in four years., A Cutoff Looms, The future of unemployment benefits for the long-term unemployed is part of the ongoing budget negotiations in Congress. Lawmakers are trying to sort out a complicated cluster of tax-break expirations and automatic spending cuts. Collectively, those budget problems are commonly called the fiscal cliff., One of the issues involved in the negotiations is the federal Emergency Unemployment Compensation program. Unless Congress reauthorizes it for 2013, more than 2 million long-term unemployed workers will be cut off from federal benefits., In November, the number of people who have been looking for work for more than six months was little changed at 4.8 million, the Labor Department said., Many economists say it's difficult to sort out exactly what the state of the job market was last month because of distortions caused by the hiring of election-related workers and Hurricane Sandy, the superstorm that knocked out power for millions of homes and businesses as it hit the Northeast in late October., A Cloudy Outlook, Even with some distortions, the jobs report seemed encouraging. But no one doubts that the labor market's future remains dicey as long as the outcome of the fiscal-cliff negotiations remains uncertain., Evidence of concerns about uncertainty showed up in the Wells Fargo/Gallup Small Business Index survey. The November survey, released Thursday, found that small-business owners plan to add fewer new jobs over the next 12 months than at any time since the depths of the 2008-2009 recession., The survey's key finding was that there is the potential for a serious decline in jobs early next year., That's what has advocates for the unemployed worried. They want the extended benefits to keep coming in 2013 to give the job market more time to heal., Sen. Richard Blumenthal, D-Conn., said Friday that in the aftermath of Hurricane Sandy, extended benefits are crucial for his region. We just suffered a major catastrophe, he said in a phone interview. The recovery will be a long slog, so there are people who will be unemployed for a long time., As the budget negotiations continue, I'm willing to go to the mat for this, Blumenthal said., Usually, the responsibility for providing workers with unemployment benefits lies with the states. The typical program gives laid-off workers up to 26 weeks of financial support, replacing up to half of their previous weekly wages. For the most part, the states set the rules for providing help and carry the costs., The total number of weeks of benefits available in any particular state depends on the unemployment rate and unemployment insurance laws in the state where the person worked. This map shows the maximum number of weeks of benefits currently available in each state., The total number of weeks of benefits available in any particular state depends on the unemployment rate and unemployment insurance laws in the state where the person worked. This map shows the maximum number of weeks of benefits currently available in each state., But when the Great Recession slammed into the job market, Congress agreed to provide additional federal funds to help states extend benefits, in some cases up to 99 weeks., When the authorization for federal unemployment benefits was set to expire in February 2012, Congress renewed the program, saying the help was needed because the unemployment rate was still over 8 percent at the time. But that extension, part of the Middle Class Tax Relief and Job Creation Act of 2012, set into motion a phase-out timetable. Currently, the maximum length of benefits is 73 weeks in states where the jobless rate exceeds 9 percent., As 2013 begins, the federal program will end, so jobless workers will have to go back to relying on their 26 weeks of state aid. People who already have exhausted that amount will suddenly stop getting checks., Reducing The Deficit, Many Republicans want to stick to the fast-approaching expiration date, saying that would help reduce the budget deficit. The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office confirms that the expiration of those benefits will lower spending by $26 billion in fiscal year 2013., Not only would ending the program reduce the budget deficit, but the change also would help the economy by spurring the long-term unemployed to search harder for new jobs, conservatives argue., They say the labor market has improved since the 2009 depths of the recession when the unemployment rate hit 10 percent. And they note that jobs are in fact available for many workers willing to make necessary changes, such as moving, retraining or accepting lower wages., Unemployment insurance makes unemployment last longer, Casey Mulligan, a professor of economics at the University of Chicago, concluded in a written assessment of the impact of extended benefits., Giving The Economy More Time To Recover, But other economists say the job market is still so bad that many people need much more than six months to find jobs. Moreover, the extended benefits help keep the economy from worsening by allowing jobless people to continue to spend money at grocery stores and gas stations, and to keep paying their rent or home mortgage. Having food, gasoline and a home with a working phone can make a job candidate more attractive to an employer., Ending federal extended benefits would reduce economic growth by about $48 billion and trigger the loss of hundreds of thousands of jobs, according to the Economic Policy Institute, a liberal-leaning research group.
It wouldn't be the worst thing that could happen to the country., If President Obama and Congress can't come to agreement on new tax and spending policies by the end of year, the U.S. could slip into recession, defense and domestic programs will see damaging cuts, and the American people may become convinced that Washington can't govern the nation., On the other hand, the lack of a deal would do a lot to help erase the federal deficit., If President Obama and Congress fail to reach a deal on tax and spending changes, the nation would feel a lot of fiscal pain. But it also may benefit from the long-term fiscal restraint that would come from keeping tax hikes and spending cuts in place., I think it's kind of a neat idea that nobody's for, says Jared Bernstein, a former top economic adviser to Vice President Biden., It's a messy way of dealing with the deficit, but the combination of automatic spending cuts and tax increases set to take effect at year's end, absent new legislation, would help balance the budget on both the revenue and spending sides., Although the fiscal cliff could well lead to recession, it wouldn't have the deeper impact that runaway deficits could have down the road, which House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan, R-Wis., and Erskine Bowles, the former co-chairman of Obama's deficit commission, have both called the most predictable economic crisis the country has ever faced., Thus, doing nothing would ultimately help the economy by putting the nation on more sound, long-term footing, argues William Gale, co-director of the Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center., Perhaps America is on the brink of a fiscal opportunity, Jack Shakely wrote in a Los Angeles Times column on Wednesday., Megadose Of Austerity, There's no drumbeat to do nothing. The fact that Obama and his congressional interlocutors aren't anywhere near accord doesn't mean both sides don't want a deal. Too many unpopular policy choices would be made by default if they fail., I don't know that there's any policymaker saying that we should just let this happen and face the music and finally get on a different fiscal path, says Bernstein, who is now a senior fellow at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities., Even though fiscal discipline is sorely needed in an era of trillion-dollar annual deficits, the looming tax and spending changes represent too much change at once, Bernstein says. It's like knowing you have to lose weight, but instead of changing diet and exercise gradually, you simply starve yourself., That's a big objection to the fiscal cliff, says Alan Viard, a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute. This would be a huge amount of austerity all at once, in an economy that's still weak., Yes Pain, No Gain, It's increasingly hard to rule out the possibility that no deal will be struck in time to avert major changes in fiscal policy. Right now, Obama and Congress face the threat of bad things happening if they don't meet their Jan. 1 deadline for tax and spending changes., But there will be even more pressure on Washington to do something if bad things really do happen. People could get angry when they see more taxes withheld from their paychecks. The broader economy could be affected quickly, particularly if markets panic., Taking action after the fact could result in the worst of all possible worlds: the nation experiences short-term economic pain without any benefit from the long-term fiscal restraint that would come from keeping tax hikes and spending cuts in place., If we go over the fiscal cliff, I don't think anyone really believes we've settled our imbalances, says Steve Davis, deputy dean of the University of Chicago's Booth School of Business. There are fundamental differences about the extent to which we should cut spending growth or tax burdens., As Davis notes, there would be immediate discussion in the new year about which of the sudden tax hikes should be reversed. Leaders of both parties favor keeping rates where they currently stand for 98 percent of U.S. households., And no economist seems to believe that Congress would leave in place changes in the alternative minimum tax or cuts in reimbursement rates to doctors under Medicare., Hitting a weak economy with this volume of tax increases and spending cuts all of a sudden is not the way to do it, Davis says., Time For A Reckoning?, The reason so many fiscal chickens are coming home to roost at the same time is that lawmakers in Washington have consistently ducked the sort of painful choices the current debate is all about balancing the budget by raising taxes or cutting spending, or some combination thereof., Perhaps no one would have intentionally designed a fiscal austerity program this way (although the potential crisis is lawmakers' doing). Despite all the potential pain, there would still be only minor changes to entitlement programs, which are major drivers of future deficits., Bernstein argues that there are plausible and in some ways attractive scenarios that could play out if there is no deal. Much of the economic damage caused by the sudden dose of austerity, he says, could be ameliorated by using some of the federal government's newfound revenues to pay for a stimulus package., The White House wants the tax and spending package to include changes in law that would essentially eliminate the congressional role in raising the debt ceiling. The nation is due to reach that ceiling its borrowing limit early in the new year. Like all other aspects of the current negotiations, it's not clear how or whether that issue will be resolved., Letting the fiscal chips fall where they may would be better than doing nothing at all to address the nation's long-term deficits, says Michael Linden, director of tax and budget policy at the Center for American Progress., But because the nation does not face a debt crisis in which lenders refuse to give the U.S. money, it's still not worth taking the immediate economic hit that would result from the lack of a deal in hopes of achieving some long-term fiscal gain, Linden says., Even people who want to close the debt quickly want to do it in a different way, he says. It is hard to find people who are unequivocally in favor of going over the cliff.
The unemployment rate dropped to 7.7 percent in November, the Bureau of Labor Statistics says. That's a four-year low., The economy added 146,000 jobs, beating expectations. Surprisingly the BLS said that Hurricane Sandy did not substantively impact the national employment and unemployment estimates for November., The BLS adds that employment increased in retail trade, professional and business services, and health care., Now, the headline from The Wall Street Journal is that this report from the BLS is the least important jobs report in 5 years. , Why? First, the November data is extremely noisy. Even without Hurricane Sandy, the Journal points out, the report includes increased hiring for the holidays as well as the jobs of poll workers during the election. Speaking of which this report comes after the elections, so the political ramifications are less urgent., The bottom line, one economist Bloomberg spoke to said, is that the country is making progress on the jobs market, even if it's not as fast as policy makers would like., Bloomberg adds:, The unemployment rate in November was forecast to hold at 7.9 percent, according to the [Bloomberg] survey median. Projections ranged from 7.9 percent to 8.1 percent., The poll of households, used to calculate the jobless rate, showed that 369,000 people were not at work because of bad weather during the survey week. The average of the last 10 Novembers was 70,000. The Labor Department said it conducted the survey a week earlier than typical because of the Thanksgiving holiday., Update at 11:33 a.m. ET. The Caveats: , As with all these things, this good report comes with many caveats. We've already touched upon the noise. The Washington Post has five other caveats. An important one that blunts the good news in this report is that many Americans dropped out of the job market., The Post reports:, Slightly more Americans dropped out of the labor force in November, although the numbers were too tiny to draw hard conclusions. The participation rate dropped from 63.8 percent to 63.6 percent, essentially erasing last month's small gains. That caused the unemployment rate to drop since the official unemployment rate only looks at those who are actively seeking work but it's never a good sign.
Please don't make me pay for your retirement., Please don't make me pay for your retirement., The U.S. birthrate just fell to its lowest point since we've been keeping track. Here's why that may be a problem for my 2-year-old son., Right now, I, my colleagues and everybody else with a job is paying to support our parents, our grandparents and all the other elderly people in the U.S. who currently receive Medicare and Social Security. Relatively speaking, there are still plenty of us working people, compared to the number of retirees., But the fall in the birthrate means that, by the time my son gets to be my age, there will be fewer working people for each retiree. So he'll have to pay a bigger share of my retirement costs which he may not want to do., So maybe we should start paying more now, or agree that retirees should accept a bit less, or do both., Or maybe we shouldn't worry about it., Hand-wringing about declining birthrates is totally unnecessary because workers become more productive over time, says Dean Baker of the Center for Economic and Policy Research., You know, a lot of these people run around going, 'In 1960, we had five workers for every retiree, and today we have three, and in 20, 25 years we'll have two,' Baker says. Guess what? Both workers and retirees have considerably higher living standards, at least on average, than they did in 1960., In other words, my son and the other workers of his generation will have a higher standard of living than we have today, so they'll be able to support those of us working today., Not everyone is convinced by this argument., When they laid out the long-term financing of Social Security, they assumed a world that didn't happen, says Phillip Longman, author of the book The Empty Cradle: How Falling Birthrates Threaten World Prosperity and What To Do About It., They assumed a world in which GDP growth would be 5 percent a year, in which poverty would wither away, in which we would be beset by the miseries of affluence, he says. And guess what? We didn't grow up to be the affluent society. We grew up in a world in which kids are more likely to be poor now than they were 20 years ago., Social Security and Medicare are sticking points in the negotiations over the fiscal cliff. Recommendations range from raising the retirement age to getting the wealthy to pay more payroll taxes and to any number of policy proposals in between. The one thing that's certain about this debate: Because of our declining birthrate, its almost certain to continue for decades to come.
Surprise: Some of the best-tasting extra-virgin olive oils are now being produced domestically. Think Texas, California, Florida., Italians may still be light-years ahead when it comes to gelato, but when it comes to extra-virgin olive oil? Watch out: U.S. producers are on it., Across the country, this small industry is expanding. Out West, there's California Olive Ranch, where production has grown tenfold over the past six years; it's now producing upwards of 2 million gallons of olive oil a year. Down South, Cowgirl Brands in Dallas is putting, yes, Texas on the olive oil map. There's even a Native American brand, Seka Hills., Currently, these domestic producers make up only a tiny sliver of the olive oil sold in the U.S. The remaining 98 percent comes from foreign producers in countries including Italy, Chile, Spain and Tunisia., And if you listen to my radio story, you'll hear the complaints that domestic producers described to the U.S. International Trade Commission during a hearing Wednesday. The commission is investigating competition in the industry. Basically, U.S. producers say their foreign competitors are not playing fair. One issue: mislabeling., Consumers oftentimes aren't receiving what they think they're purchasing when they buy a bottle of [imported] olive oil, says Gregg Kelley, CEO of California Olive Ranch., In September, Consumer Reports found that many of the big names in imported olive oil, such as Bertolli and Filippo Berio, don't taste good enough to meet the criteria to be extra-virgin. The term refers to olive oil made from crushed olives without the use of high heat or chemical solvents., Gregg Kelley of California Olive Ranch taste tests his competitor's brand., Americans consumers who buy these false extra virgins are being duped, Tom Mueller, author of Extra-Virginity: The Sublime And Scandalous World of Olive Oil, told the commission., Major recent surveys of olive oil quality suggest that two-thirds of olive oil currently sold as 'extra virgin' in America is mislabeled: They fail to meet the major legal definitions of the extra-virgin grade, Mueller said., So, what's the best tip for getting fresh extra-virgin olive oil?, Look for a harvest date on the bottle, Mueller tells The Salt. For example, on California Olive Ranch oils, which are sold at major grocery chains including Safeway, Kroger, Wegman's and Wal-Mart, you'll see the date stamped on the bottle. Many foreign producers don't include this information in their packaging., Mueller explains that freshness is key because olive oil is not like wine: It does not get better with age. In fact, both the flavor and the nutrients in olive oil deteriorate over time., In the new year, I plan to take a deeper look at olive oil, deconstructing its potential health benefits. But for now, suffice it to say, extra virgin is full of the good stuff polyphenols and other compounds that are believed to have anti-inflammatory properties., The North American Olive Oil Association which, despite its name, actually represents many foreign producers of olive oil rejects the U.S. producers' complaint that importers are not playing fair., I think the complaint is highly exaggerated, says Eryn Balch of the NAOOA., On the whole, she says, her members comply with labeling requirements, and their products are routinely tested to make sure they're not adulterated with other oils. The test results are not reported publicly., We have ongoing and consistent testing throughout the year, says Balch. And like domestic producers, she says her organization supports additional testing and a new national standard., Freshly picked Arbosana olives from the Texas Olive Ranch in Carrizo Springs, Texas., Freshly picked Arbosana olives from the Texas Olive Ranch in Carrizo Springs, Texas., The U.S. International Trade Commission's report will be published sometime in 2013.
Shoppers carry bags during Black Friday sales at the South Shore Plaza in Braintree, Mass. Right now, consumers are feeling positive, but the mood among businesses is at recession levels., Shoppers carry bags during Black Friday sales at the South Shore Plaza in Braintree, Mass. Right now, consumers are feeling positive, but the mood among businesses is at recession levels., When it comes to the economy, consumers and business owners have very different takes right now. Consumers are feeling positive, but the mood among businesses is at recession levels., In a word, business owners are bummed., What we've found is that a lot of that optimism is not there right now, says Dennis Jacobe, chief economist for Gallup, which polled these small-business types just after the election., A third of businesses surveyed said they plan to cut back on spending in the next year; 1 in 5 say they'll be reducing staff. That's the highest percentage of business owners planning layoffs since the survey started a decade ago., Jacobe says a big reason is the fiscal cliff those automatic tax increases and spending cuts that will take effect starting next month if Congress doesn't act to change it., Small-business owners face some of the things that are in the fiscal cliff right now ... as they set up their payroll for next year, Jacobe says. There are a bunch of things that business owners have to think about as we're so close to the new year that the fiscal cliff brings home to them., Take Ray Gaster, president of a lumber company in Savannah, Ga., where the housing market is rebounding. Gaster had planned to hire three more workers to his staff of 31., Right now, we put some hiring decisions on hold because of the uncertainty up in Washington, D.C., and we're not sure what kind of effect that's going to have on housing and the general economy, Gaster says., &ldquo; Consumers seem less focused on the fiscal cliff at this point, and therefore we see a divergence in sentiment., - Lynn Franco of the Conference Board, In the short term, he says, he's pessimistic. And though he's found good candidates, he doesn't want to hire them only to lay them off again., Lynn Franco, a director at the Conference Board, which surveys both businesses and consumers, says consumer sentiment has been going up in recent months., Consumers seem less focused on the fiscal cliff at this point, and therefore we see a divergence in sentiment, she says., Franco says consumers are looking past the still high unemployment rate to a stock market that's done relatively well this year and a housing market that's begun to recover. She also says business sentiment plummeted to recessionary levels during the debt-ceiling negotiations last year, then rebounded fairly quickly, so perhaps the same will happen if Congress and the White House can hammer out a deal over the fiscal cliff soon., Bruce Lackey, president of Happy Chicken Farms near Columbus, Ohio, says he anticipates business taxes will increase next year regardless of whether the fiscal cliff is reached or not. So he front-loaded a lot of big-ticket investments like trucks and equipment to this year to take advantage of relatively low tax rates., Now I'm not going to have to purchase those for the next year and a half to two years, Lackey says., Lackey is reasonably upbeat. His business has fully rebounded from the recession and is growing as the Ohio economy improves., If your business goes up and you need people, you're going to hire them, he says., And if sales improve, slightly higher taxation levels won't keep him from hiring more people next year., On Friday, the Labor Department will issue its jobs report for November and provide a new read on how the economy is doing.
Looking for work: There was a long line last month as job seekers waited to get into an employment fair at Kennedy-King College in Chicago., Looking for work: There was a long line last month as job seekers waited to get into an employment fair at Kennedy-King College in Chicago., There were 370,000 first-time claims for unemployment insurance last week, down 25,000 from the week before, the Employment and Training Administration says., The drop is another sign that after several weeks of spikes because many people were thrown out of work due to damage related to late October's Superstorm Sandy, claims have now settled back into the range where they've been for most of the past year., We'll get much more news about the labor market on Friday, when the Bureau of Labor Statistics releases the November unemployment rate and figures on payroll employment., Reuters reports that economists expect BLS will say that employers added just 93,000 jobs to payrolls last month. Weak growth like that means it's unlikely the unemployment rate 7.9 percent in October fell in November., Another reason to expect a relatively weak report about last month's labor market:, Job cuts increased for the third consecutive month in November, as employers announced plans to shed 57,081 workers from their payrolls. That was up 20 percent from the previous month when announced layoffs totaled 47,724, according to the latest report from global outplacement consultancy Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas, Inc. November cuts were 34 percent higher than the 42,474 job cuts announced by employers in the eleventh month of 2011.
Atlantic City's boardwalk, with its shops, restaurants, casinos and hotels, was mostly protected during Hurricane Sandy by a dune restoration project. But TV images of one small section that was damaged gave the impression that the whole thing was destroyed., Atlantic City's boardwalk, with its shops, restaurants, casinos and hotels, was mostly protected during Hurricane Sandy by a dune restoration project. But TV images of one small section that was damaged gave the impression that the whole thing was destroyed., A month after Hurricane Sandy pounded the New Jersey Shore, Atlantic City is back in business. Even though most of the casinos and restaurants sustained very little damage in the storm, they're now suffering from a lack of visitors. But the city has launched an effort to change that., As three young boys roll their skateboards down the World Famous Atlantic City Boardwalk, it's proof that it is still here, fully in tact, and that rumors of its demise were greatly exaggerated., Rumors of the demise of Atlantic City's boardwalk were greatly exaggerated only a small part was damaged. Now city and tourism officials are trying to draw people back., Rumors of the demise of Atlantic City's boardwalk were greatly exaggerated only a small part was damaged. Now city and tourism officials are trying to draw people back., Conditions down here are a lot better than I thought they would be, says Ed Cody, a visitor from Philadelphia, who along with his fiancee, Cheryl Lyons, was making a midweek getaway., What I heard during the storm over there was just like the boardwalk was all torn up and there was sand in the street, Cody says., The pictures on the TV made it look worse, Lyons adds., Sandy's high winds and floodwaters did devastate scores of homes and businesses in Atlantic City, especially around the Back Bay areas, but along the oceanfront, a dune restoration project protected most of the boardwalk and the shops, restaurants, casinos and hotels on it., Sandy did damage one small section of the boardwalk, but city and tourism officials complain that TV news showed those images over and over again giving viewers the impression that the entire boardwalk was destroyed., So, they're fighting back with a new TV ad, which is airing in New York, Philadelphia, Baltimore and Washington, D.C. It shows people biking and jogging on the boardwalk, along with scenes of Atlantic City's night life., At Atlantic City's Tropicana Casino resort, business has been slow since Hurricane Sandy, but it's starting to pick up again., At Atlantic City's Tropicana Casino resort, business has been slow since Hurricane Sandy, but it's starting to pick up again., I think the message here is that ... we're open for business. We're in great shape physically and, quite honestly, we need your help, says Liza Cartmell, president of the Atlantic City Alliance, which is sponsoring the ad., The alliance was created a year ago as a marketing arm of the casino industry. Competition from new casinos in nearby states had already begun to cut into business, and a severe slowdown since Sandy has led to layoffs and reduced hours for many workers. So Cartmell says Atlantic City urgently needs an economic boost., We have 40,000 people whose livelihoods depend on these casinos. They are the ones who were impacted at home, where their homes may have been flooded. They need their jobs and income in order to rebuild, Cartmell says., Inside the Tropicana Casino, there's actually a fair number of people for a midweek December afternoon, playing slot machines, blackjack and other games., Tropicana President and CEO Tony Rodio says business is picking up after a very slow November, but he worries about Sandy's long-term impact on his customer base up and down the Atlantic Coast., There's people whose lives have been impacted by this, and it's not going to take weeks or months, it's going to take years for people who have homes that were totally destroyed, or second homes or businesses, and there's a ripple effect to that, Rodio says., At Jay's Souvenirs on the boardwalk, Yaqob Abro says it costs him more to commute to work and keep the lights on than he's making in sales most days., At Jay's Souvenirs on the boardwalk, Yaqob Abro says it costs him more to commute to work and keep the lights on than he's making in sales most days., And that ripple doesn't just go through the big casinos, but inside the small, kitschy shops along the boardwalk, as well., Yaqob Abro greets a lone shopper who walks into his souvenir shop, and she has her eye on a certain purse., How much is it? she asks., This is $15, but you are my first customer all day. I'll take $13, Abro answers., I can't do it, the woman replies, but thank you., And so it goes at Jay's Souvenir Shop, where Abro says he's hardly selling anything., Today, like, I open at 11 o'clock, now it's almost 4 o'clock, I got only one customer, $15. And last night, I was here until 5 o'clock, I make only $25, he says., Abro says it costs him more to commute and keep the lights on than he's making in sales most days. He says if this slow pace continues, he might not be able to make it to the more profitable months of spring and summer.
It's red alert time for aerospace industry executives, workers and contractors., As they mingled today at the Aerospace Industries Association's annual Year-End Outlook luncheon at a Washington Grand Hyatt, the bright red electronic digits kept counting down for them., The ever-changing figures on the large digital clock, set up on the ballroom stage, reminded the roughly 300 luncheon participants of the time left before they feel the effects of massive, automatic cuts in government spending., Stop the clock, said a sign above the digits., As silver forks started to pick at green salads, the clock's countdown digits read: 27 days 11 hours 10 minutes 5 seconds., Aerospace workers may be facing huge layoffs if planned federal spending cuts go forward under a legal process known as sequestration. The cuts, including roughly $54 billion for U.S. national security spending, will commence in the new year unless Congress stops them during the complicated negotiations in progress on Capitol Hill., Defense budgeting should not be reduced to a mere political bargaining chip, AIA President and CEO Marion Blakey said. Her scarlet suit matched the red digits as she stood along side the countdown clock., It is far too easy to conclude that the companies, workers and communities that comprise this industry can withstand anything; that they can adapt to any change, no matter how sudden or harmful, she said., Blakey labeled herself an optimist who believes Congress will solve this fiscal crisis and block the drastic cuts now set on autopilot. But even so, the fiscal cliff drama already has harmed her industry, and the nation, she says., What message did sequestration telegraph to the world about our country, our commitment to national security, our commitment to economic prosperity and our commitment to the next generation of defense and aerospace innovation? she asked.
House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, takes questions as House Majority Leader Eric Cantor, R-Va., and Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, R-Wash., look on during a Capitol Hill news conference on Wednesday., House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, takes questions as House Majority Leader Eric Cantor, R-Va., and Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, R-Wash., look on during a Capitol Hill news conference on Wednesday., The president and House Republicans continued to snipe at each other Wednesday over the impending set of automatic tax hikes and spending cuts known as the fiscal cliff. They traded accusations and blame during another day with plenty of talk, but until late in the day, at least no negotiations., The Associated Press, citing a spokesman for House Speaker John Boehner, said President Obama and Boehner spoke briefly Wednesday afternoon by phone. The call raises the possibility that negotiations will soon resume between the White House and congressional leaders, the AP reported., Earlier in the day, the two sides were speaking publicly, but not to one another. The Republicans went first:, We want to sit down with the president. We want to talk specifics, said House Majority Leader Eric Cantor of Virginia. We put an offer on the table now. He's out of hand rejected that. Where are the specifics? Where are the discussions? Nothing is going on., Boehner, the Ohio Republican, agreed:, If the president doesn't agree with our proposal and our outline, I think he's got an obligation to send one to the Congress and a plan that can pass both chambers of Congress. If you look at the plans that the White House has talked about thus far, they couldn't pass either house of the Congress., Of course, neither could the plan Boehner has tabled, with a promise of $800 billion in revenue raised by closing unspecified tax loopholes., President Obama is introduced to the Business Roundtable by Boeing CEO Jim McNerney in Washington on Wednesday., President Obama is introduced to the Business Roundtable by Boeing CEO Jim McNerney in Washington on Wednesday., The White House spent a considerable amount of effort in public on Wednesday trying to demolish the mathematical and political premises of that proposal., White House economic adviser Jason Furman gave reporters a detailed handout explaining why unless you wanted to eliminate or severely curtail tax deductions for the middle class or for charitable giving the Republican plan would only produce $450 billion in revenue, not $800 billion., President Obama went before the Business Roundtable, a group of corporate CEOs who have not been friendly to him in the past, to suggest that no deal could be done until the Republicans gave in on raising tax rates. Said Obama:, Now, we've seen some movement over the last several days among some Republicans. I think there's a recognition that maybe they can accept some rate increases as long as it's combined with serious entitlement reform and additional spending cuts. If we can get the leadership on the Republican side to take that framework, to acknowledge that reality, then the numbers actually aren't that far apart., In which case, the president said, we could get a deal in about a week., But that makes it sound too easy. Raising tax rates is by far the most difficult issue for Republicans and would probably have to be addressed with a creative plan to help Boehner deal with opposition among his conservative House majority., But White House officials seemed to be suggesting that Obama might not even sit down with Republicans at the negotiating table until they cried uncle on tax rates., On Wednesday, Obama also delivered a warning to Republicans not to tie the fiscal cliff debate to the fight over raising the country's borrowing limit:, If Congress in any way suggests that they're going to tie negotiations to debt ceiling votes and take us to the brink of default once again as part of a budget negotiation which by the way we have never done in our history until we did it last year I will not play that game., The president once again sketched out a two-step process: By the end of this year, come up with a down payment on revenues, spending cuts and entitlement reforms. And then: We have open running room next year to deal with a whole host of other issues like infrastructure, tax reform and immigration reform that will further make America Inc. competitive; that's one option, said Obama.
Alan Krueger, chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, warns that consumer spending will drop if Congress and the White House fail to reach a deal on spending cuts and tax increases., Alan Krueger, chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, warns that consumer spending will drop if Congress and the White House fail to reach a deal on spending cuts and tax increases., Tax increases are only a part of what lies ahead if Congress can't come to an agreement to avert the fiscal cliff by the new year. Massive spending cuts will also kick in and those cuts will be felt throughout the economy., The current stalemate got under way two years ago when Congress, locked in a bitter partisan battle over whether to extend the George W. Bush-era tax cuts, passed what was known as the Budget Control Act of 2011., If Congress couldn't resolve its spending battles by the end of 2012, the law said, there would be what are called sequester cuts automatic, massive reductions in nearly every part of the budget., Across-The-Board Cuts, Cary Leahey, senior adviser with the consulting group Decision Economics, says the cuts affect both good programs and bad., Each particular program which would be affected would all be cut pretty much by the same percentage amount, Leahey says. And it would not be done rationally it would just be done that you cut all programs the same., Altogether, the cuts would eliminate more than $110 billion in federal spending in 2013 alone. Nearly half of that would be in defense spending. But there would also be cuts in education, health care and law enforcement. Much of that money goes to the states in the form of grants., State budget officers and policymakers have already had to make a series of really serious decisions on balancing their budgets, says Ingrid Schroeder, director of the Fiscal Analysis Initiative at the Pew Center on the States. This is going to add a whole other layer of complexity to some already tough decisions that they've made., 'You're Going To Feel It', Schroeder says states like Virginia and Maryland, which depend heavily on federal spending, will take a hit, as will states with a strong military presence, like Hawaii. Former Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Alan Blinder says cuts in defense spending have a way of spilling over into the rest of the economy., If you run a business near a military base a cafe, a grocery store, a bowling alley ... a restaurant, anything and the military base has meaningful cutbacks in spending, you're going to feel it as a civilian, Blinder says., But even without this kind of spillover effect, Blinder says the looming sequester cuts will slow the economy at a time when it's already weak. He says the cuts could reduce economic activity by anywhere from 0.7 percent to 1 percent., And a 1 percent reduction in economic activity, he says, means about a 1 percent cut in the labor market., And 1 percent of employment in the United States now is roughly 1.3 million jobs, Blinder says. That's not good., A Little 'Wiggle Room', Blinder notes that the cuts won't necessarily happen right away; the government, he says, has some wiggle room about when it implements them. So if the two sides are close to an agreement on Jan. 1, they can stall a bit. But he also says the window for solving the dispute is closing., My judgment would be that if this is not settled by the second half of January, we're going to feel severe effects on the economy., And there are signs the effects are already being felt. Leahey, of Decision Economics, says companies need time to plan when they bring in new people and that they may already be holding back on hiring in anticipation of the cuts., So if the numbers for this Friday's employment report are dismal, it may not be [due to Hurricane Sandy] it may be preparing for these sequester cuts, Leahey says., All of this will be happening at a time when consumers are already feeling the bite from higher taxes and that could be an even bigger problem for the economy.
A demonstrator carries a sign calling people to resist President Barack Obama perceived socialist policies during a march of supporters of the conservative Tea Party movement in Washington., A demonstrator carries a sign calling people to resist President Barack Obama perceived socialist policies during a march of supporters of the conservative Tea Party movement in Washington., The dictionary Merriam-Webster has declared an incongruous pair their words of the year: Socialism and capitalism., There's no surprise there that politics was in people's minds, the dictionary's Editor-at-large Peter Sokolowski told CBS News when making the announcement., Sokolowski said that the dictionary, which bases its decision on what people are looking up in their online edition, chose two words for the first time because they trended together., Most of the time, when a person looked up one word, they looked up the other. Sokolowski says their data some 100 million page views a month captures the culture fairly well., He says that as Americans listen to the political debate and the news, they use the dictionary to begin their research., So 2012's two words socialism and capitalism which are essentially antonyms tell us just how divided the country was during a presidential election that presented a stark decision for the future., In his interview with CBS, Sokolowski said the words were looked up when healthcare was in the news and also became very popular as the election season wrapped up., For the record here are the definitions from Merriam Webster:, &mdash; Capitalism: an economic system characterized by private or corporate ownership of capital goods, by investments that are determined by private decision, and by prices, production, and the distribution of goods that are determined mainly by competition in a free market, &mdash; Socialism: any of various economic and political theories advocating collective or governmental ownership and administration of the means of production and distribution of goods, The word of the year in 2011 was pragmatic and in 2010, it was austerity., Sokolowski said that one of the words that saw the biggest spike this year was malarkey, which as you probably remember was used by Vice President Joe Biden during his debate with Rep. Paul Ryan., Schadenfreude or enjoyment obtained from the troubles of others saw a spike on election day and was a runner up.
Saying it needs to further reduce expenses and improve efficiency across the company, Citigroup announced today that it is eliminating about 11,000 jobs 4 percent of its global workforce., The banking giant also said it is expects to take pre-tax charges of approximately $1 billion in the fourth quarter of 2012 and approximately $100 million of related charges in the first half of 2013., Bloomberg News points out that new Citigroup CEO Michael Corbat is adding to a January cost-cutting announcement by predecessor Vikram Pandit, who had previously sought to boost some of the businesses targeted today. The new CEO is responding to an industrywide slump in trading and investment banking, stiffer capital requirements and Europe's debt crisis. Goldman Sachs Group Inc., Morgan Stanley and UBS AG are among rivals focused on reducing costs., The New York Times' DealBook blog says that under the reduction, 1,900 jobs will be eliminated in the institutional clients division. Another 6,200 positions will be removed from the bank's consumer banking business, along with 2,600 jobs in the operations and technology group., Forbes calls this the Citigroup bloodbath and says that since on Wall Street and around the world big banks are firing workers ... Citigroup is joining the club., Update at 2:45 p.m. ET. More About Citi's Problems., As DealBook adds:, Citigroup has had a turbulent recent history, after teetering on the brink of collapse during the financial crisis and receiving a $45 billion lifeline from the federal government. After emerging from the financial crisis, it has been sharply reducing its expenses and trying to shed even more troubled assets in an effort to restore the bank to its past profitability., But those efforts have been dogged by missteps and turmoil. In March, for example, the Federal Reserve dealt a stunning blow to Citigroup when it scuttled the bank's plans to raise its dividend or increase share buybacks. Shortly afterward in April, the bank's shareholders, in a rare move, voted against a $15 million pay package for Mr. Pandit., Executives at Citigroup are still struggling to rein in the bank's business and work through a mass of bad assets in its Citi Holdings unit.
A closed sign at a coffee shop in New York City, where many businesses had to shut down for at least a few days before, during and after Superstorm Sandy., A closed sign at a coffee shop in New York City, where many businesses had to shut down for at least a few days before, during and after Superstorm Sandy., There were 118,000 jobs added to private employers' payrolls in November, according to the latest ADP National Employment Report., That's slower growth than in October, when ADP's employment measure grew by 157,000 jobs., In its report, ADP quotes Mark Zandi, chief economist of Moody's Analytics, as saying that Superstorm Sandy [which struck in late October] wreaked havoc on the job market in November, slicing an estimated 86,000 jobs from payrolls., In coming months, watch to see if the rebuilding in New York, New Jersey and other places where Sandy hit hard gives a boost to employment., ADP's report is sometimes an early sign of what the Bureau of Labor Statistics will say when it releases its monthly employment and unemployment data. That agency is due to release its November figures on Friday.
Work can start again: This ship, loaded with containers, was sitting beneath idle cranes Tuesday at the Port of Los Angeles., Work can start again: This ship, loaded with containers, was sitting beneath idle cranes Tuesday at the Port of Los Angeles., From 'Morning Edition': Kirk Siegler and Renee Montagne, A week-old strike that crippled the ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach and kept about $1 billion worth of goods a day from arriving on shore is set to end today., We've got a deal and people are going back to work, Los Angeles Mayor Antonio Villaraigosa announced late last night, as our colleagues at Southern California Public Radio report., On Morning Edition, NPR's Kirk Siegler said the work stoppage at the nation's busiest ports was prompted by the walkout of several hundred clerical workers, who wanted guarantees that their jobs won't be outsourced in the future. More than 10,000 regional members of the International Longshore and Warehouse Union refused to cross the picket lines., Details about the deal struck soon after two federal mediators were called in, which prompted union leaders and company officials to sit down again haven't been released. But the Los Angeles Times writes that Steve Berry, lead negotiator for the Los Angeles and Long Beach Harbor Employers Association, said the package included unspecified wage and pension increases. He also said there was added job security to the deal, that included a 'no layoff' clause that would go into effect once ratified., While there is a huge backlog of goods waiting to be taken off ships, Kirk said the delays should not affect the arrival of toys and other goods intended for U.S. stores during this holiday season. Retailers got those shipments weeks or months ago., Though the deal still needs to ratified by workers, KPCC's Wendy Lee reports that union leaders are confident it will be approved. So work can resume today. She was posting updates last night as the news was announced.
Dairy farmer Bob Andrews feeds heifers in the same barn his grandfather used. He says today the harder you work, the further you get behind., Dairy farmer Bob Andrews feeds heifers in the same barn his grandfather used. He says today the harder you work, the further you get behind., There's more than one cliff drawing controversy this month. The federal farm bill is one of many items caught in congressional gridlock. The bill resets U.S. agriculture policy every four years, and most farmers are still covered by crop insurance and other programs until next planting season. But there's one exception: dairy., Dairy farmers now have no safety net if milk prices fall. And with feed prices soaring, many feel they're falling off a cliff of their own., In a cramped barn in northern New York state, Bob Andrews is lugging hay to his heifers. He says the dairy business is upside down. Do you realize that feed is more valuable right now than it is putting it through a cow? Andrews asks., In other words, his raw materials the hay, and the corn and soy he feeds his 70 milkers are worth more than his final product: the milk. Last summer's drought is a big reason why., But dairy farmers are price takers, not price makers. The federal government sets a minimum price for milk, but it hasn't kept pace lately with increased prices for feed or energy or the cost of repairing farm equipment., So, Andrews says dairy farmers just work harder, become more efficient. Many farmers milk more cows. Used to be the harder you worked, the better you were off, financially, he says. Today, the harder you work, the further behind you get in this business., A program called the Milk Income Loss Contract (MILC) helped with the bottom line. It paid farmers when the milk price went too low or feed prices went too high. But it expired as a part of the 2008 farm bill in October. It was particularly important to small dairy farmers like Andrews in the Northeast and Midwest., Clark Putman, the local director of the USDA's Farm Service Agency, keeps ears of corn on his desk as a reminder of how the high cost of feed is threatening dairy farmers' livelihood., Clark Putman, the local director of the USDA's Farm Service Agency, keeps ears of corn on his desk as a reminder of how the high cost of feed is threatening dairy farmers' livelihood., We would have still been making payments in this county to approximately 200 dairy producers, explains Clark Putman, director of the USDA Farm Service Agency branch in the county where Andrews lives. Putman notes that instead of some farmers getting a monthly check of $1,000 to $4,000, they're in triage mode., They either borrow more money, discontinue paying vendors, cull beef heavier than normal, anything to generate income to try to continue to operate, he explains., There's another problem with inaction over the farm bill, what insiders are calling the dairy cliff. Chris Galen, a spokesman for the National Milk Producers Federation, the largest trade group representing dairy producers, contends that he coined the term., If the lame duck Congress fails to pass a new farm bill or extend the old one, a 1949 law would take effect in January that would almost double the price of milk. Experts warn of $6 to $8 gallons of milk at the store if that happens. Galen says it's like the fiscal cliff: It's supposed to make Congress avoid it, so that Congress actually passes a new farm bill as opposed to reverting back to this decades-old law., Galen says the new farm bill includes a voluntary insurance program that would replace MILC. He says it would be better for small and big dairy farms., Critics on the right and left say the farm bill is loaded with too many subsidies like this. Some farmers, like Sam Dyer of northeastern New York, are uncomfortable with it, too., Dyer says he'd like to compete on the free market no government subsidy. I don't want this interview to make it sound like I'm crying on somebody's shoulder, either, cautions Dyer., But he can't set his own prices, so he needs help. The government subsidy is enough to keep the wolf away from the door. But it's not enough to put money in your pocket and make money or make a living, says Dyer., So, he's hoping Congress acts soon, before that wolf pushes him over the cliff.
Some top-tier business schools are offering more than just finance and marketing these days: Duke, UCLA, MIT and Stanford are all teaching improv. Professors say these techniques help students increase collaboration, creativity and risk taking., In an improvisational leadership class at MIT's Sloan School of Management, instructor Daena Giardella coaches a scene where a hospital administrator is firing surgeons after a horribly botched operation., Giardella, who does professional improv, boils it down to a rule known as yes, and., Yes, and means that any idea offered must be accepted., You generously give the offer, and then you try to bring something else to the table so that you're building a scenario together, and no one person is totally responsible for that, she tells the class., According to improv instructor Daena Giardella, it's not about whether you make the perfect offer, it's about how you rebound if you don't., According to improv instructor Daena Giardella, it's not about whether you make the perfect offer, it's about how you rebound if you don't., Something like: Hey, you know, I'm really excited about this launch we are going to be doing. It's so great to be working together at NASA. , But students must be prepared for a block: Huh? I don't work at NASA. Or: What do you mean? What launch?, Giardella says idea blocking happens all the time in the business world. And one of the most common blocks is the yes, but., Even though you say, 'Yes,' the but says, 'Yeah, but that's not really valid because here is the better point.' , The yes, but lesson is one that Giardella's second-year student, Lauren Kaplan, takes to heart., And now I notice it every time that I do it. And I am trying and practicing to not do that and to be more flexible and to note the way that it changes a conversation, Kaplan says., Getting MBA students comfortable with improv can take time., Kaplan was worried at first about letting loose. Will I come off as silly? Or how might some of the things we are doing affect my professional reputation with my classmates who, in some ways, when you are in an MBA program, you consider your classmates to also be colleagues. she says., Jeff Guan took the improv class a few years ago while at MIT. He now works in wealth management for Citibank in New York. I was nervous because I was chosen on the first day to dance on the stage, he remembers., Guan started out shy, but he stuck with it., Some people quit right after the first class because they couldn't handle it, says Guan. They thought this should be an uptight professional environment., Dancing is not the only curveball Giardella throws at her students. She wants these overachievers to learn and to fail., And as soon as I say that, usually I get so many eyebrows going up, because of course in a business environment and certainly an academic environment, use the word fail and people take notice, Giardella says. But as an improviser, you gotta know how to rebound. It's not about whether you make the perfect offer, it's about how you rebound if you don't., Cristiane Oliver, one of her former students, now lives in Miami and is a senior director at Burger King Corp. She was recently trying to present a performance improvement plan. The team included folks from finance, marketing and operations. She saw each of them as a piece of a puzzle but apparently they didn't., I saw in their eyes, in their face, I could read the others they are not understanding at all, Oliver says., Realizing she was in trouble, she asked herself what she could do to not lose the audience. She backed up. And, using personal examples, she took the time to really illustrate how each of them fit together., And then she went on to sell her plan.
Chris Guthrie, vice president for operations at Canna Pi medical dispensary, inspects a medical marijuana product at his clinic in Seattle on Monday. Marijuana will be legal in Washington state from 12:01 a.m. Thursday., Chris Guthrie, vice president for operations at Canna Pi medical dispensary, inspects a medical marijuana product at his clinic in Seattle on Monday. Marijuana will be legal in Washington state from 12:01 a.m. Thursday., Marijuana is legal in Washington state as of 12:01 a.m. Thursday, but the ballot initiative that made it legal last month contained a new DUI standard a deal-sweetener for hesitant voters that may actually make life riskier for regular pot users., The new law makes it legal for adults to possess up to 1 ounce of marijuana, but illegal for that same adult to drive if the THC content of his blood reaches 5 nanograms per milliliter., Steve Sarich, who uses medical marijuana for back pain, says he wakes up at four to five times the legal limit. Six weeks ago, he said that if the legalization initiative passed along with the new DUI standard he'd either have to hire a driver, or leave Washington., I haven't left the state yet, he says. But, you know, I realize that I take my legal life in my hands every time I do get behind the wheel., Sarich ran the most vocal opposition campaign to the initiative mainly on the issue of the new blood-content limit. He's convinced that he and other regular users of medical marijuana will be stuck on the wrong side of the law., He's right to worry, says Peter Peaquin, one of Seattle's top DUI lawyers., It is a Pandora's box, he says., Peaquin says driving impaired by pot was already illegal. What changes now is that pot users have to learn to think in nanograms per milliliter. Even for someone who has built up a high tolerance, Peaquin's advice is simple., I'm telling him, do not get behind the wheel, he says, even if he's feeling totally fine, because the mere fact of having that level in his blood and driving a car makes him a criminal., Surprisingly, the advice from the Washington State Patrol is a mellower. Spokesman Bob Calkins says pot users should keep in mind that troopers won't be pulling people over for random blood tests., Regardless of whether this person has been a regular user of marijuana, may have a routine THC level in his blood of this point or that point, if he's driving OK, he's probably not going to come to our attention, Calkins says. And if he's driving badly, he probably is going to come to our attention., Besides the DUI question, pot users in Washington face another conundrum: Where to get it? The new law legalizes possession, but there's still no legal way for recreational users to acquire it. The law calls for the state to set up a network of licensed growers and pot stores, but that will take at least a year, assuming it's not challenged by the federal government. Marijuana is illegal under federal law., In practice, though, pot is readily available, especially in places like Seattle's University District. You could go with the dealers outside the Jack in the Box restaurant, or just walk into a medical marijuana store., Three young guys are sipping Starbucks cups filled with mushroom tea; they plan to round off their afternoon with a bit of weed. Questions about Thursday's legalization are met with a shrug., Nothing really changes for medical card members. If you have your cannabis card, then you're set, says one of them. Nothing changes. You can still go to the dispensary and get your buds., The reality is that it's easy to get medical marijuana cards for complaints like anxiety, usually from alternative medicine clinics. Still, some obstacles to the untrammeled enjoyment of marijuana do remain in Washington. One pro-pot group was all set to hold a legalization party in a county-owned facility until officials realized it would run afoul of the state's strict ban on smoking any kind of smoking in public spaces.
Home Depot has long offered credit cards, partly to serve customers who have just suffered major house damage. The company has recently widened those efforts. Here, a Tampa, Fla., customer buys a generator and bottled water, preparing for Tropical Storm Isaac's arrival in August., Home Depot has long offered credit cards, partly to serve customers who have just suffered major house damage. The company has recently widened those efforts. Here, a Tampa, Fla., customer buys a generator and bottled water, preparing for Tropical Storm Isaac's arrival in August., Retailers are finding more ways to offer their customers financial products mortgages, loans and the like. In the past, people looked to banks for this kind of product. But big-box stores are trying to find new ways of getting money to those who cannot use banks, or want to avoid them altogether., Costco may be best known for pallets of bottled water or bulk toilet paper that can last a family an entire year. But earlier this year, it also added mortgages to its growing array of financial offerings., Costco is not actually making the loans. Rather, it refers customers to its partner banks, with whom it has negotiated discounts on closing costs and interest rates., Jay Smith, the director of business and financial services for Costco, says offering mortgages helps boost Costco's No. 1 profit center: annual membership fees., This is a great way to increase that value for membership, he says, and that's why we're offering loans., Costco, which also offers auto and home insurance, is just one of the latest entrants in the alternative consumer finance market, an area some refer to as shadow banking., For some retailers, like Home Depot, branded credit cards and loan offerings are old hat. The home improvement chain established its credit and loan offerings almost at its inception. That's because it sells lots of big-ticket items, especially after disasters like Hurricane Sandy, when there is sudden demand for new credit., Home Depot's vice president of financial services, Dwaine Kimmet, says the company recently sweetened its offers in part because other sources of credit have dried up., And customers just can't get access to capital, because there's just not equity in their homes, in many cases, he says., Offering credit in a store also helps sales, of course. Wal-Mart, the world's largest retailer, partners with other companies to offer checking accounts, check-cashing, money orders and a host of other services., Alternative financial products appeal to a growing number of people, says Wal-Mart Vice President Daniel Eckert., I think there's also a group of the population that engages in these services, frankly because their needs are not being met by 'mainstream financial services,' and are unhappy about the value proposition or the costs, he says, adding that those customers have found that this is a better way for them to manage and control their finances, and is more accessible to them., In fact, in a recent report, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., which regulates banks, said a growing number of Americans are going outside the mainstream banking system to manage their money. More than 8 percent of U.S. households avoid traditional banks altogether., Norma Garcia, a senior attorney for Consumers Union, says the fact that retailers see an opportunity in financial service products is a sign of the times., And it really should be a wake-up call for the banks that they are losing customers, she says. And that they need to be more responsive to the needs of consumers., Garcia notes the backlash against banks over increased overdraft fees and other charges. She says that although mortgages offered through Costco and checking accounts through Wal-Mart may offer some lower initial fees, Consumers Union is still studying the products to see whether they also come with notable drawbacks., What we have seen is that the protections vary considerably, she says. It's not always apparent to the consumers what the risks might be with that product. In some cases there are activation fees, [or] there are dormancy fees if you don't use the product for a certain period of time., Just because they might appear at the checkout aisle, she says, mortgages and loans are not and should not be impulse buys.
A promotional image for the Netflix Just for Kids portal. The new deal announced with Disney is the first time that one of Hollywood's major studios has sold the coveted rights to Netflix Inc. instead of a premium TV network., A promotional image for the Netflix Just for Kids portal. The new deal announced with Disney is the first time that one of Hollywood's major studios has sold the coveted rights to Netflix Inc. instead of a premium TV network., Netflix's video subscription service has trumped pay-TV channels and grabbed the rights to show Disney movies shortly after they finish their runs in theaters., The multiyear licensing agreement announced Tuesday represents a breakthrough for Netflix as it tries to add more recent movies to a popular service that streams video over high-speed Internet connections., Netflix will have exclusive U.S. rights to offer the first-run movies through its streaming service during the period normally reserved for premium TV network such as HBO, Starz and Showtime. That period starts about seven months after movies leave theaters. The exclusivity does not extend to DVDs, a service Netflix is trying to phase out., Investors applauded Netflix's coup, lifting the company's stock by $8.86, or nearly 12 percent, to $84.86 in afternoon trading., It's the first time that one of Hollywood's major studios has sold the coveted rights to Netflix Inc. instead of a premium TV network. DreamWorks Animation SKG Inc. licensed the pay-TV rights to its movies to Netflix last year under a deal that begins in 2013, but those movies don't wield the same box-office appeal as Disney, whose stable includes Pixar Animation and Marvel., Starz currently holds the rights to The Walt Disney Co.'s movies under a deal that expires in 2015. Beginning in 2016, Netflix will get the movies instead. Direct-to-video movies will come to Netflix sooner, as will older movies such as Dumbo and Alice in Wonderland., In Tuesday's news release, the Los-Gatos, Calif.-based Netflix didn't disclose how much it is paying Disney., The Disney deal gives Netflix a measure of revenge against Starz, which had been demanding a price that Netflix refused to pay when their licensing agreement expired earlier this year. The Starz rights had included Disney movies, so losing that access had been seen as a blow to Netflix., The stock price of Liberty Media Corp., Starz' owner, dropped $7.08, or 6.4 percent, to $103.97 in afternoon trading. Shares of Disney, which is based in Burbank, Calif., lost 3 cents to $49.26.
The Republican plan to avert the fiscal cliff that the White House rejected Monday includes at least one element that's likely to produce controversy: a proposal that would, among other things, affect the cost of living adjustment for Social Security., The basic argument is that the current annual inflation adjustment for Social Security and some other federal benefits overstates the true impact of inflation, NPR economics correspondent John Ydstie tells Audie Cornish, host of All Things Considered. So, people are actually getting a bigger adjustment than they should., Cost of living adjustments, which were added to Social Security in 1975, are based on inflation as measured by the Consumer Price Index, which measures the cost of a basket of goods. But many economists believe the CPI overstates the effect of inflation and prefer a different index, the chain CPI, which takes into account the substitutions that people make when prices rise., Let's say the price of beef goes up a lot, Ydstie says. What people do is eat less beef and maybe more chicken, to keep their cost of living down. The current CPI doesn't account for those substitutions very well, and the chained CPI does. So, it measures inflation more accurately., The switch by consumers to cheaper alternatives shaves about a quarter of a percentage point from the rise in their cost of living. Although annual changes aren't large, over a long period they compound into significant numbers., Ydstie offers an example of someone earning $1,000 annually from Social Security. If inflation under the current measure was 2 percent last year, he says, that person's Social Security payment next year would be $1,020., But, under the new chained CPI, your benefit next year would be $1,017 a month $3 less. Not a lot, he says. However, let's say you live a long time, say 25 years on Social Security, the effects would compound and reduce your benefit by almost 10 percent., The proposal has been criticized by congressional Democrats as well as seniors' groups like AARP, which argues that the chained CPI actually underestimates inflation costs for seniors, who spend more on health care than average Americans. Health care costs rise faster than average inflation., Despite the opposition, however, this element of the plan could be part of getting to a compromise over averting the fiscal cliff, a combination of major tax increases and drastic spending cuts scheduled for the end of the year., The idea was on the table when President Obama and House Speaker Boehner were negotiating over a grand bargain last year, Ydstie says. And it does provide a good deal of deficit reduction around $200 billion over 10 years., Half of that figure comes from smaller Social Security benefits, but an additional $50 billion comes from added tax revenues because it affects inflation adjustments in the tax code, too., That's part of its appeal because it brings in more tax revenues and reduces Social Security spending, Ydstie says. It requires sacrifice from both Republicans and Democrats, but also gets each side something they want.
AAA has warned against potential damage that a new blend of gasoline could do to some engines. And the warning has started a fight over renewable fuels and the future of what we put in our gas tanks., The fuel is called E15 named for the percentage of ethanol in the blend. Most of the gas that's sold in the U.S. has about 10 percent ethanol in it., The Environmental Protection Agency has certified that all vehicles from 2001 and newer can run on E15. But, says Eric Evarts with Consumer Reports, many automakers have said that they will not honor warrantees for cars running on E15, even among the cars that the EPA says can run it., Companies who say their warranties will not cover fuel-related claims caused by E15 BMW, Chrysler, Nissan, Toyota and Volkswagen, Companies who say E15 may void warranty coverage GM, Ford, Honda, Hyundai, Kia, Mazda, Mercedes-Benz and Volvo, Vehicles approved by automakers to use E15 flex-fuel models; 2001 model-year and newer Porsches; 2012 model-year and newer GM vehicles; and 2013 model-year Ford vehicles, Source: AAA, That's because many automakers are worried that the new mix of fuel can damage the fuel lines in your car over time., We're not opposed to ethanol, we're not opposed to ethanol being added to gasoline. Our concern is that the E15 blend is one that has the potential to do damage to people's vehicles if they inadvertently put it in their gas tank, says AAA CEO Robert Darbelnet., AAA wants to suspend sales of E15 gasoline. The group surveyed its members, and 95 percent of them didn't know what it was., We are opposed to E15 being made available to consumers who have not been adequately informed of the consequences of using the product, nor have they been adequately informed of whether or not they could put it in their vehicle without risking violating their warranty, Darbelnet says., Bob Dinneen, CEO of the Renewable Fuels Association, an ethanol industry trade group, points out that E15 is available in only a handful of gas stations. He says there's plenty of time to educate drivers about the new fuel., I think AAA has been sidling up to the big oil companies a little too much, and their concerns about E15 are completely misplaced, Dinneen says. It's really about the future and other advanced biofuels that, if demonstrated to be viable commercially, can take not 10 percent of the barrel, but a third or 40 or 50 percent of the barrel. That's what this is about., Meanwhile, the EPA says it's working to let consumers know which cars can and cannot use E15., But unless laws change, it's still on the way to gas stations soon.
Despite their recent woes, daily deal companies Groupon and Living Social can be profitable, says analyst Arvind Bhatia., Are the days of daily deal coupons about to expire? Shares of email coupon company Groupon are down nearly 80 percent since going public last year. And its smaller rival, Living Social, plans to lay off as many as 400 employees, after reporting a net loss of more than $560 million in the third quarter., Those struggles have raised questions about the future of the daily deal strategy, and whether a company like Groupon can stay in business., It's ... an evolution of the company that's happening, says Arvind Bhatia, managing director of equity research for the investment firm Sterne Agee, in an interview with NPR's David Greene. They have a decent balance sheet, Bhatia says of Groupon. As long as they continue to generate profitability, I think the business can survive. Stern Agee trades in Groupon shares and has an investment banking relationship with Groupon., On the coupon business model, I think fundamentally, the model can work. But it needs scale. Keep in mind that Groupon was born out of the recession ... at a time when people wanted to see deals. So they were right in the sweet spot of what people really wanted. And they've grown really fast., But ... the daily deal business seems to be peaking. And in some ways, Groupon is a victim of its own success. It's hard for them to continue to grow the daily deal business the way they did before., On the need for scale, Both Living Social and Groupon Groupon, in particular have spent tons and tons of money in acquiring these customers. They have something like 160 million people whose email list that they have. That is what is attractive to merchants. So, you need scale to succeed., On complaints about deals, The deals that merchants offer are deeply discounted deals. And those are meant to be deals that bring customers in. And hopefully, customers like the product and keep coming back., Sometimes what happens is, the merchants that are using this product maybe don't know how to use it appropriately. And maybe their service isn't good enough and they were hoping this would be this one last desperate move to get customers in before they go out of business. So, it depends on the merchant itself., On the evolving daily deal business, In the beginning, it was all about, let's acquire customers at all costs. Now, particularly for Groupon, it's OK, you've got the customers. Now show us how you can make money with this business model., So one thing they have to do is slow down on their spending. And they're doing exactly that., On moving past email, What they've talked about is tapping into, perhaps, search engines like Google and Bing to attract more customers. And that's a pretty significant move. Keep in mind that 25 percent of all searches ... are for local products., But right now, they're driving very little business from these search engines. So that's an opportunity for them to now go after customers that are looking for deals in general, not just through the emails.
President Obama and House Speaker John Boehner on Nov. 16., President Obama and House Speaker John Boehner on Nov. 16., It's apparently still too early for any of Washington's top policymakers to start blinking in the fiscal cliff stare-down. So there's no need to panic yet., That's the real message of Monday's congressional Republican counteroffer to President Obama's proposal for avoiding the fiscal cliff, the combination of major tax increases and drastic spending cuts scheduled for the end of the year., Those large tax hikes and spending reductions could lead to another recession, economists warn., The House Republicans' offer, not surprisingly, didn't include a tax-rate hike on the wealthiest taxpayers, a requirement Obama has said is nonnegotiable if there's to be a pact., Of course, House Speaker John Boehner and other Republican leaders have, for their part, called such a rate increase a nonstarter., Obviously, before this is all over, one side is going to have to yield on this fundamental issue of higher tax rates for couples whose households have more than $250,000 in income (or single individuals with incomes of more than $200,000)., Neither side on Monday sounded like it intended to be the first to make significant concessions, however. Answering questions on Twitter, the president insisted his approach of allowing higher tax rates on the top 2 percent of taxpayers was the only way to avoid bigger spending cuts to programs the middle class relies on while still achieving deficit-reduction targets., For his part, Boehner struck an equally unyielding tone in a counterproposal that contained no tax-rate increase and an estimated $2.2 trillion in combined spending cuts and revenue increases., House Republicans relied, in part, on changes that would make Medicare less generous to future beneficiaries. Obama has rejected similar proposals in the past., So far apart are the Obama proposal and the House GOP counterproposal, trying to reconcile them into some sort of agreement by the end of the year seems about as doable as squaring a circle., Conventional wisdom, however, is that the negotiators don't have equal leverage, that the president has the stronger hand. After all, he won re-election on the campaign promise that he would fight for higher taxes on the highest-income taxpayers. Polls repeatedly show that a solid majority of voters support his position., Unfortunately, the nation is getting plenty of experience with these end-of-the-year cliffhangers, so to speak., In 2010, Obama and House Republicans fought until nearly the last moment over extending the Bush tax cuts and long-term jobless benefits past their expiration date, the end of that year., At the end of 2011, the president and congressional Republicans fought over extending the payroll tax holiday until the witching hour was virtually upon them., Then, there was the mid-2011 standoff over raising the debt ceiling limit, the one that led to the downgrade of the nation's credit rating., Indeed, it was the agreement that resolved that dispute that led to the current disagreement between the president and House Republicans., The pact to end the 2011 debt-ceiling fight included the forcing mechanism of the fiscal cliff as a spur to a bipartisan deficit-reduction accord., Clearly, the specter of such spending cuts and tax increases hasn't gotten scary enough to force the two sides to already narrow their differences. But brinkmanship has long been a mainstay in Washington politics, and so it is still. If the offers on the table in a few weeks are as far apart as now, that might be the time to get really get nervous.
News Corp. CEO Rupert Murdoch in February 2011, when The Daily was launched. Now, it's in shutdown mode., News Corp. CEO Rupert Murdoch in February 2011, when The Daily was launched. Now, it's in shutdown mode., Saying that we could not find a large enough audience quickly enough to convince us the business model was sustainable in the long-term, News Corp. CEO Rupert Murdoch said this morning that The Daily will cease standalone publication on Dec. 15., Launched less than two years ago, The Daily was designed to be a newspaper for the iPad era, as All Things D says. When he showed off the site in early 2011, Murdoch said that new times demand new journalism., In a statement, Murdoch said The Daily will will live on in other channels. Technology and other assets from The Daily, including some staff, will be folded into The [New York] Post., According to NPR's David Folkenflik, the news about The Daily was part of a series of announcements concerning News Corp.'s upcoming split. One part of the company, David tells our Newscast Desk, will include newspapers, a book publisher, and various Australian TV holdings it will retain the historic name News Corp. The other, larger entertainment and TV conglomerate with such properties as the Fox movie studio and Fox News will be called Fox Group., He adds that:, The Wall Street Journal's top editor, Robert Thomson, will head the new News Corp. He will be replaced at the Journal by his deputy, Gerard Baker., The Daily's top editor, Jesse Angelo, will become publisher of the tabloid New York Post. James Murdoch, [Rupert's son], will remain deputy chief operating officer of the new Fox Group away from the papers which triggered the hacking and bribery scandal in the U.K., Update at 9:45 a.m. ET. New York Times Looking To Trim Staff:, Jill Abramson, executive editor of The New York Times, told her staff this morning that she was seeking 30 managers who are not union members to accept buyout packages, the Times' Media Decoder blog reports., According to the blog, the hiring The Times has done in recent years to help make it more competitive online has restored the newsroom to the same size it was in 2003 about 1,150 people. But an increasingly troubled advertising environment has led to the need for trimming.
Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner says it's up to congressional Republicans to take the next step in budget talks to avoid the pending automatic spending cuts and tax increases at the end of the year., Appearing on the Sunday talk shows, Geithner said there's no path to an agreement until Republicans are willing to accept higher tax rates on the rich., The GOP argues that if tax revenues must go up, it would be better to leave rates alone and instead limit deductions, or loopholes., In the presidential debate on Oct. 16, Mitt Romney presented a hypothetical way to cap deductions and raise revenue., In the presidential debate on Oct. 16, Mitt Romney presented a hypothetical way to cap deductions and raise revenue., Favoring A Cap, The idea of shrinking or eliminating tax deductions to raise money for the government is not new. Former presidential candidate Mitt Romney floated it, to offset the cost of his big tax cuts., One way of doing that would be to say everybody gets I'll pick a number $25,000 of deductions and credits, he said in the Oct. 16 presidential debate. And you can decide which ones to use your home mortgage interest deduction, charity, child tax credit and so forth. You can use those as part of filling that bucket, if you will, of deductions., Romney may have lost the election, but the idea of limiting deductions lives on. Congressional Republicans have embraced it as a way to raise tax revenue without having to raise tax rates. Even some Democrats are willing to go along, if that's what it takes to win Republican support., We're in a political environment, and there's just a lot of different ways to skin this cat, says Jim Kessler, a senior vice president at the centrist think tank Third Way., There's a lot of money to be made from this particular cat's skin. According to the Tax Policy Center, capping deductions at $50,000 per household would raise an extra $749 billion over a decade. That's about $300 billion more than the government would get from raising the top two income tax rates, as President Obama has proposed., If the cap on deductions were set lower say $25,000, as Romney suggested the government would raise even more revenue: $1.2 trillion over a decade. Most of the extra tax would still be paid by the wealthy, but some would be collected from middle-income families., Who Benefits From Deductions, Al Trevisan has one of those families that would be affected by a deductions cap. He's 43 and has been a firefighter for 20 years. His wife is a stay-at-home mom. Trevisan's income is well below the top tax brackets., But last year, he and his wife had $41,000 in itemized deductions, largely because they live in the pricey housing market of Ventura, Calif., where even a modest home can carry a mid-six-figure mortgage., At least in Southern California, to make somewhere under $200,000 and have over $35,000 in tax deductions, it's pretty normal. ... All of our friends are pretty much in the same boat, he says., Connecticut is another state where even middle-income families can have a lot of deductions. Greg Rutherford and his wife make about $150,000 a year, of which they deduct $35,000 to $40,000., Two large pieces of deductions are: our state income taxes, and then our local property taxes also [tend] to be pretty sizable, Rutherford says., People in the pricey blue states along the coasts tend to have the biggest tax deductions. But limiting tax breaks could also hit some red state residents in the middle of the country. The highest average deductions for charity contributions are in Wyoming, Utah and South Dakota., 'An Obligation To Give Back', Rutherford says he's not necessarily opposed to paying more in taxes. But he'd prefer to see an increase in the top tax rates as one way to address the country's big income gap., I was also a former military officer, and I honestly believe that just being born here gives you an opportunity that people in other parts of the world simply don't have, he says. So if you happen to be successful, I think you have an obligation to give back to kind of improve the rest of society as well., Trevisan also has mixed feelings about any effort to limit his tax deductions., As a firefighter, I understand that taxes need to be paid. That's where my salary comes from. That's how we fund new fire stations, he says. But I also have to look at it [as] I'm just an average, middle-class guy trying to make a living for myself and my family, and it's tough.
Jessica Bermudez, 24, models a dress at Deja Vu in Alexandria, Va. Bermudez is competing for the title of Miss District of Columbia USA, and says she regularly enters beauty pageants., Jessica Bermudez, 24, models a dress at Deja Vu in Alexandria, Va. Bermudez is competing for the title of Miss District of Columbia USA, and says she regularly enters beauty pageants., Miss America's walk might look effortless, but her road to success probably cost more than you think., Ten-thousand women will compete in a Miss USA-sponsored pageant this year. That organization is just one of more than 15 small circuits, each with its own local, state and national competitions. It's a big industry. From the organizers, designers and coaches, lots of people make money except the contestants., Below are cost estimates provided by pageant coach Victory Mohamed: , Source: Victory Mohamed, Twenty-four women are in the running to become the latest Miss District of Columbia USA., When competitor and graduate student Jessica Bermudez went to Deja Vu, an Alexandria, Va. boutique specializing in pageant gowns, the price tags were as dazzling as the dresses., Store manager Derek Ferino pulled out a gown for Bermudez to try on a floor-length royal blue number with rhinestones on the front. The price tag: $3,000., Bermudez, 24, won't say how much she paid for the dress she eventually chose, but Deja Vu's evening gowns start at $700. Some cost as much as $4,000., If you thought Bermudez's parents are signing the check, you'd be wrong. She uses the money she earns working part-time at as a technical project manager at the National Institutes of Health to pay her way through the pageantry world., Bermudez also gets sponsored by local businesses in exchange for promoting their products, and she spends a lot of time fundraising., A Costly Crown, Carl Dunn, CEO of Pageantry magazine, says pageants are big business., First of all, you have the event itself, that's what you're looking at, Dunn says. Then behind that, you do have the designers, makeup artists, trainers, facilitators, possible sponsors., Beauty pageant contestants often need multiple pairs of shoes, like these seen at Deja Vu, per pageant to accompany different outfits. That alone can get pricey., Beauty pageant contestants often need multiple pairs of shoes, like these seen at Deja Vu, per pageant to accompany different outfits. That alone can get pricey., Victory Mohamed, the current Miss Baltimore and third runner up in this year's Miss Maryland America competition, works as a pageant coach. She says if you want to compete seriously, you need to be prepared. And that means money., If you're doing it right, you would have to spend at least $500 to $2,000 on a gown for a U.S.A. Pageant, $200 for an interview outfit, including accessories, shoes that whole thing, and $50 to $300 on a great swimsuit, Mohamed says., That's just the clothes not even the makeup. And then there's coaching, which can range from $40 to $300 per hour. Mohamed charges $50., But I think, doing it right, I would definitely invest in the coaching, in the fitness trainer, in the makeup, in the outfit, she says. You can't get to Miss America or Miss Universe without doing it right, doing it all the way., It can pay off though. Mohamed says she won a scholarship that helps her pay for graduate school. Pageants also helped launch her professional pageant and image consulting company that she runs out of her basement studio., 'Well Worth It' If Bermudez can persuade the Miss D.C. judges to give her the crown, she'll win a cash price of about $1,000 and the opportunity to compete for the title of Miss USA next summer. But even if she doesn't win, she says competing in Miss D.C. USA is a great investment., You get experience with public relations and getting your message out there, Bermudez says. My personal message is to promote STEM Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics so I think it's very well worth it., Bermudez says she feels confident about her chances., You always go in with high hopes, she says. You go in as prepared as you can, but you never go in expecting anything., It seems like the only thing all the contestants can expect is a hefty price tag.
I grew up in a car family. Not car enthusiasts; car makers. My grandfather worked for General Motors in Detroit on the assembly line beginning in the 1940s. My mother was a middle manager at Ford's Chicago assembly plant in the '70s. I worked at the same plant during summers in the '90s. Today, one of my cousins works for Chrysler and another works for an auto supplier., Like millions of other African-American families, my family went from being small-town subsistence farmers to being middle- and upper-class workers thanks to the U.S. auto industry. For my family, buying American has been a manifestation of not only patriotism but racial pride., But what does it mean to buy American? The auto industry has changed profoundly since my grandfather took the train from Thomasville, Ga., to Detroit during World War II., Because of transportation costs and global currency fluctuations, among other things, car makers in the last 30 years have started making cars closer to where they are sold. As a result, the nationality of the car companies can get a little complicated., The National Highway Transportation Safety Administration issues a report each year that details the cars that are made in America. The report looks at where the parts, the transmission and the engine come from., According to the latest report, the most American car is the Toyota Avalon, which is built in Georgetown, Ky. Eighty-five percent of that car's parts are sourced from the U.S and Canada a higher percentage than for any car made by a U.S.-based manufacturer. Honda just celebrated its 30th anniversary in the U.S., It's not just about currency fluctuations and labor costs. Car companies need to build cars where they sell so they can build the right car, according to Rebecca Lindland, Director of Research for IHS Automotive. You have to be local to understand what motivates that person to spend six months of their pay on your product., The industry is converging in terms of style, design, feel and quality. Twenty years ago [an] American car drove in a very distinct way compared with [a] foreign car, says Joe DeMatio, Deputy Editor of Automobile Magazine. That's disappearing., As foreign car makers have expanded in the U.S., U.S. automakers have expanded overseas. The Ford Fusion, for example, is now made in Mexico., And my mother now drives a Volvo.
The latest comic of the week on Bazooka Bubble Gum's Facebook page., Many of us are still not over the demise of Twinkies. Now there's this., Bazooka Bubble Gum is redoing is packaging and, says The New York Times:, What adults may remember best about Bazooka ... is disappearing. The tiny comic strip featuring the eyepatch-wearing brand mascot Bazooka Joe that has been wrapped around each piece of gum since 1953 is being replaced., New inserts will feature brainteasers, like a challenge to list 10 comic book heroes named after animals, or activities, like instructions on folding the insert into an airplane. They also include codes that, when entered at BazookaJoe.com, will unlock content like videos and video games., Bazooka Joe and his sidekick, Mort, who wears his turtleneck up over his mouth, will appear only occasionally as illustrations in the new inserts, but without the antics and corny jokes of the three-panel strips., Just two weeks ago, Washington Post humorist Gene Weingarten posted an interview with Jay Lynch, a main gag writer for Bazooka Joe comics from 1967 to 1990. Here's an bit of their conversation:, Weingarten: Hemingway always secretly admitted that he was proudest of The Sun Also Rises. Do you have a secret favorite strip you'd like to share?, Lyncy: In the 1980s, Bazooka Joe had a girlfriend named Zena. So I had her call and order something with a credit card. They ask her name and her expiration date, and she says, How do I know when I'm gonna die?, Weingarten: I remember that!, Lynch: That was mine. It was actually original. Most weren't. Most were very old jokes., Their conversation, wrote Weingarten, one of my favorite interviews of all time., But starting in January, a comic will no longer wrap each piece of gum. The company says it's trying to be more relevant to today's kids., Perhaps we won't answer the phone if Weingarten ever calls us.
After Hurricane Sandy, the town of Madison, N.J., which runs its own power utility, had electricity restored long before its neighbors., After Hurricane Sandy, the town of Madison, N.J., which runs its own power utility, had electricity restored long before its neighbors., While thousands of people on the East Coast waited weeks for big utility companies to turn the lights back on after Superstorm Sandy slammed ashore, the residents of Madison, N.J., had power just days after the storm. This leafy New York City suburb operates its own municipal utility and now some neighboring towns are asking whether they should, too., We were able to power up sections of town within two days, said Madison Councilman Robert Landrigan. And then, by the weekend [after the storm], most of the town was back., That was not the case a few miles away in Summit, N.J., where it took Jersey Central Power and Light 12 days to restore power to everyone. We had a long, rough slog with this storm, says Summit Mayor Ellen Dickson., In the company's defense, Dickson says Jersey Central had to restore power to 90 percent of its customers. When you're in a numbers game [for] who can get them up fastest you go for the easiest: the low-hanging fruit ... bringing up a lot of people at once, Dickson says. So honestly, when it comes down to a leafy suburb with lots of trees, where it's very difficult to get the wires back up, we are probably much lower on the chain., Crews That Know The Neighborhood, &ldquo; [Our crews] work on our four square miles on the sunny days ... So when the storms come, they know our territory inside and out., - Robert Conley, the mayor of Madison, N.J., But the storm's aftermath played out very differently in Madison. Both towns had lots of downed trees, and both lost power. But unlike Summit, Madison is responsible for the lines that deliver electricity to homes and businesses, along with trucks and repair crews., Madison Mayor Robert Conley says the operation is tiny, but it does have some advantages over crews from bigger utilities who may never have worked in the area before. [Our crews] work on our four square miles on the sunny days, Conley says. So when the storms come, they know our territory inside and out. They know where the trouble spots are. They know exactly where to go to., Madison has had a long time to get this right. The town started its own utility in the 1880s. Today, it's one of just nine municipally owned utilities in the state. James Jablonski, executive director of the Public Power Association of New Jersey, says his members have a built-in incentive to be responsive to their customers., If they don't get the service back quickly, they don't need to worry about trying to call an 800 number or whomever else, said Jablonski. Chances are they know the mayor and they'll call, or a council member, and say, 'Hey, what's going on here?' , Officials in nearby Summit got calls too from constituents who had to drive five miles to Madison to go to the movies or charge their cellphones. Frustration with Jersey Central Power and Light has been growing since last year, when the company also had a tough time getting the lights back on after two major storms., Local Is 'Appealing' But Costly, Now Summit is thinking about starting its own utility., There may be very much renewed interest in that, says City Administrator Chris Cotter. Because the idea of being able to locally direct restoration efforts is one that certainly is appealing., But Cotter knows it would not be easy. No city in the state has taken over electrical distribution in more than a generation, in part because of the high cost of buying the existing light poles, transformers and other equipment from the incumbent utility., Dickson, Summit's mayor, admits getting into the electrical distribution business would be a drastic step. But she thinks Jersey Central could learn a few things from city-owned utilities like having a dedicated repair crew that knows the local terrain, and investing in up-to-date equipment., The electric grid in our town looks very old and tired, Dickson says. The transformers look old and tired. The poles are not in great shape. There's a lot that could be done there. You don't have to run your own utility company, Dickson says, to see that.
The beloved pool hall/restaurant's famous sign., The beloved pool hall/restaurant's famous sign., Twinkie hoarders, artists, and Ding Dong enthusiasts weren't the only consumers affected when Hostess started shutting down plants across America just a few weeks ago. At Booches Billiard Hall, a popular restaurant and pool hall in Columbia, Mo., it was the patrons seeking the joint's famous hamburgers that were left on the line., The 128 year-old institution frequented by Mizzou students, old men playing snooker and everyone in between, had used a nearby Hostess plant as its sole supplier of 3/4 buns for its burgers, says Charlie Kurre, a Booches co-owner., A softly-lit Booches' burger, back in the days of the Hostess bun., A softly-lit Booches' burger, back in the days of the Hostess bun., Before the Hostess shutdown, Booches burgers were considered some of the best. A USA Today report in 2000 listed Booches among the top 25 burger joints in the country. Outside magazine couldn't stop popping them this past May. The slightly undersized white bun allows the meat and cheese to ooze out the sides. It's small, like a slider, but it's not exactly bite sized with a solid quarter pound of beef in it. For cheese, you have a single option: a melty American-Swiss combination binds the bun and patty and has done so since time immemorial., Notably, the burger is served without a plate or utensils. Nothing but a modest square of wax paper separates the burger from the table., The first time I came to Booches, they served my burger on a little wax paper and I thought what? But then I realized that that's part of it. It makes the whole experience, says Jessica Quinlan, a Columbia native. For as long as she can remember, the Booches burger has been exactly the same. Nobody is sure exactly how far back in history the Booches burger goes, but it has existed in its current form since at least the 1970s. Now, for the first time in decades, Booches must change its time-honored recipe. Its new buns come from a local grocery store just a few miles from downtown Columbia., In the frantic days after the Hostess closures, many area restaurants followed suit. But don't go looking for those new grocery store jobs. The grocery chain Hy-Vee says they saw a small bump in sales during that first week, but it quickly disappeared as most restaurants eventually found cheaper national distributors. Booches, however, thinks they'll stick with the new buns, which technically come from a Sara Lee bakery and look pretty much the same., Most of the regulars I talked to couldn't detect a difference in flavor or texture, but to my palate, it's there. Hostess buns are airy and insubstantial. The fluffy nothingness that is enriched white bread is not meant to assert itself, but to yield pleasantly, letting the seasoned beef shine., The Hy-Vee buns are slightly coarser in texture, bringing their flavor a little closer to the front. It's still a great burger, and it always has been. It's just different now. It's the process of evolution, says Trey Quinlan over an after-work drink. Eventually things change. This place used to be gentlemen only. Change isn't necessarily bad.
Nov. 17: A sign in a Staten Island storefront tells a lot. It was still closed because of the damage done by Superstorm Sandy in late October., Nov. 17: A sign in a Staten Island storefront tells a lot. It was still closed because of the damage done by Superstorm Sandy in late October., The economic effects of Superstorm Sandy continue to be felt. According to the Bureau of Economic Analysis, consumer spending edged down 0.2 percent in October from September, and personal income dipped 0.1 percent., As Bloomberg News says, Sandy kept some in the Northeast from getting to work or from shopping at malls and car dealerships., Economist Chris Christopher at IHS Global Insight tells Bloomberg that holiday sales will be a little weaker than we originally thought because Sandy took out some of the momentum.
House Speaker John Boehner of Ohio speaks to reporters on Capitol Hill Thursday after private talks with Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner., House Speaker John Boehner of Ohio speaks to reporters on Capitol Hill Thursday after private talks with Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner., No substantive progress has been made. That's what House Speaker John Boehner had to say Thursday about efforts to avoid automatic spending cuts and tax increases at year's end., The administration's lead negotiator, Treasury Secretary Tim Geithner, met with congressional leaders from both sides of the aisle Thursday, looking for an agreement on the hazard Congress and the White House created last year to focus their minds on deficit reduction., Perhaps the most important sticking point is over income tax rates. The outcome of the negotiations will determine how many Americans will face higher tax rates and how much of a hike it will be., Obama's Proposal, President Obama has proposed that top tax rates for well-off Americans rise to their levels from before the Bush-era tax cuts. But he wants to keep the Bush tax cuts for the middle class. So income tax rates for couples making less than $250,000 and individuals making less than $200,000 would remain where they are., What would that mean for you? Well, if you're among the well-off and earn more than those amounts, the money you make above those levels would be taxed at 36 percent and 39.6 percent up a few points from where they are taxed now, and exactly where they were during the Clinton administration. For the top 1 percent of taxpayers, this change would boost their tax bill a lot., That tax increase would amount to something in the neighborhood of $120,000, says Donald Marron, co-director of the Tax Policy Center., The center has crunched a lot of numbers related to the tax effects of the fiscal cliff and the various proposals to avoid it. Len Burman, who used to run the center but now is a professor at Syracuse University, says allowing the Bush tax cuts to expire for the well-off would put a dent in the deficit., Raising the tax rates to basically the pre-Bush levels for the high-income people would raise about $850 billion over 10 years, he says., But would that be a bulldozer-size dent or a baseball-size dent in the deficit?, It's significant ... but we're looking at $10 trillion-plus in deficits over the next 10 years, so this is less than 10 percent of the total, Burman says., The president would reduce the deficit an additional 5 percentage points through his proposal to reduce the value of tax deductions for the wealthy., The Fiscal Plunge Scenario, But what if policymakers can't reach an agreement and we go over this fiscal cliff? Tax rates would go up across the board. The Tax Policy Center says about 90 percent of Americans would see their tax bill increase., For a middle-income household, this increase would be around $2,000; for a low-income household, it would be around $400, says center co-director Marron., While that's not a pleasant thought, allowing the Bush-era tax cuts to expire for everyone would cut deficits significantly, Burman says., We'd raise $2.2 trillion in income tax revenues over the next 10 years and $430 billion in estate tax revenues, he says., That would cut projected deficits by about 25 percent over the next 10 years a much more sizable chunk, but still not enough to solve the deficit problem., Of course, the shock to the economy of the abrupt tax hikes and spending cuts would likely cause the economy to plunge back into recession. That's really why they call it the fiscal cliff., GOP Pushes Tax Reform, Republicans say hiking rates for anyone is the wrong approach. They want to extend the Bush tax cuts for everyone for one more year. That would mean a $400 billion boost to next year's projected deficit., But during the year, Republicans say, Washington could work on changes to tax policy and entitlements and try to close the budget gap for the long term. Glenn Hubbard, dean of Columbia University's School of Business and an adviser to Mitt Romney, agrees. He says raising rates is a bad idea., I'd rather see us talk about tax reform, Hubbard says. That is, have the Congress say, 'OK, here's the dollars that we need to raise in revenue, now let's talk about a better tax system.'
As Democratic and Republican leaders try to work out a deal to avoid the automatic spending cuts and tax increases of the fiscal cliff, one area they're zeroing in on is investment income., Raising the rates on capital gains and dividends, even just for the wealthy, would bring in $240 billion over the next decade. That makes them an easy place to look for new revenue., Kent Harvey would like President Obama and Congress to look somewhere else., Harvey, the chief financial officer at California power company Pacific Gas and Electric, was walking the halls of the Capitol earlier this week, trying to convince members of Congress that raising taxes on dividends would be a very bad idea., It's the No. 1 issue for the utility industry, he said., If Obama gets what he wants in the fiscal cliff negotiations, capital gains would go from being taxed at 15 percent to more than 20 percent for high-income Americans. And dividends would go from that same 15 percent rate to more than 39 percent., Harvey says this would turn investors off of companies that offer dividends and hurt stock prices. Utilities depend on their dividends to attract investors, including senior citizens., Which brings us to Fred and Eleanor., They're the stars of an ad that's part of a multimillion-dollar campaign funded by utilities and other companies under the name Defend My Dividend., In the ad, Fred tells Eleanor that the rate on our dividends would more than double., But we depend on our dividends to help pay our bills, she protests. We worked hard to save., Actually, under the president's proposal, the taxes on Fred and Eleanor's dividends would more than double only if their combined income was more than $250,000 a year., Roberton Williams of the Tax Policy Center says most seniors don't have much to worry about., The concern about elderly who rely on dividends and capital gains for their income has no basis, Williams says. If they're high income, yes, their taxes will go up. But they're not going to be having to eat dog food., But if Congress and the president fail to reach a deal, taxes on investment income would rise for everyone, not just the wealthy., So, what would higher capital gains and dividend taxes mean for the broader economy?, I think this is one of the reasons why we've seen some concerns expressed in the stock market since the president was re-elected, says Randy Kroszner, a professor of economics at the University of Chicago. A significant spike in capital gains and dividends taxes would reduce the value of equities., And, he says, if stock prices go down, companies will have less money to invest in equipment and even employees. It's not a straight line, but Kroszner says raising these taxes could hurt the economy., It's not just a tax on the wealthy. It's a tax on the productive capacity of the economy, Kroszner says., Princeton economist Alan Blinder isn't as worried. He says that when these taxes were lowered, he didn't see strong effects on the positive side at least not as significant as you might expect., I see the evidence as very mixed and certainly, certainly not pointing strongly to a powerful negative, he says., Blinder says in some instances raising these rates will hurt, but he doesn't expect it to be hugely disruptive. And as with most questions of economics, the policy debate will probably long outlast this political fight.
As the White House and Congress debate how to steer clear of the fiscal cliff, one obstacle is the president's insistence that the wealthy should pay more in taxes. And one way that could happen is through changing the rules for dividends and capital gains., If you own a share of stock in a company today, when the company pays out a dividend, the most you're taxed is 15 percent. And if you decide to sell the stock and cash out, you'd also pay 15 percent on your profits the capital gains., The tax code has long favored investment income over the money you get in your paycheck. But today's rates are especially low, dating to tax cuts installed under President George W. Bush., Back in 2003, Congress set the top tax rates for both capital gains and dividends at 15 percent, lower than they had been since the 1930s., Now, President Obama wants to raise those rates, but only for the wealthy., Under his plan, for those earning more than $250,000 a year, capital gains would be taxed at 20 percent, and dividends would go back to being taxed as they had historically, as ordinary income, more than doubling the current rate., Of course it's never a bad time to be rich. But it's a worse time to be rich now because, you know, President Obama has clearly said he wants the wealthier Americans to shoulder a bigger burden of the tax liability, says Bill Smith, with accounting firm CBIZ MHM., Raising rates on investment income, as the president has proposed, would bring in about $240 billion over a decade. If Congress and the president can't reach a deal and the Bush tax cuts expire for everyone, it would be even more., Smith says that as a result, some companies are making sure to pay dividends before Jan. 1, and many people are cashing out investments to realize the capital gains in 2012. He speculates the tax changes may have been on filmmaker George Lucas' mind when he sold Lucasfilm to Disney earlier this year., Roberton Williams of the Tax Policy Center says he was wondering the same thing when the deal was announced. Lucas certainly will save if we have the president's plan go into place, or go over the fiscal cliff., Like $400 million., He'll save more in tax than we will make in our entire lifetimes, says Williams., Fewer than 20 percent of taxpayers report income from dividends, and even fewer get money from long-term capital gains., There are certainly plenty of people who have the two shares of McDonald's their grandfather bought them, or are supplementing their income with dividends from the power company where they worked. But Williams says that's not what you should picture when you think about who is benefiting from the low rates in the current tax code., High-income people are much more likely to have investments in the first place and more likely to have income from those investments, he says. And their tax savings are greater than those for people in lower income categories, because the difference between the capital gains rate and dividends rate and their ordinary tax rate is larger., Williams says more than half of today's tax benefit on investment income goes to people in the top one-tenth of 1 percent.
Better than expected: Economic growth was higher in the third quarter than first thought. Here, a worker at a Ford plant in Michigan plugs a batter into a Ford C-MAX plug-in hybrid vehicle., Better than expected: Economic growth was higher in the third quarter than first thought. Here, a worker at a Ford plant in Michigan plugs a batter into a Ford C-MAX plug-in hybrid vehicle., The U.S. economy grew at a 2.7 percent annual rate in the third quarter, the Bureau of Economic Analysis says. That's a sharp upward revision in its estimate of gross domestic product growth from mid-summer into the fall. In its first look at the quarter's GDP, the agency estimated growth at a 2 percent annual rate., According to BEA, consumer spending, inventory investment, exports and federal spending all contributed to growth from July 1 through Sept. 30., In the second quarter, GDP expanded at a 1.3 percent annual rate., Also this morning:, There were 393,000 first-time claims for jobless benefits last week, down by 23,000 from the week before, the Employment and Training Administration reports., The decline brings claims back into the 350,000-to-400,000 pace they had been running at before Superstorm Sandy pummeled the Mid-Atlantic and Northeast in late October., Wednesday, there was more modestly good economic news about the housing market.
Toyota unveils its new RAV4 crossover SUV to the media Wednesday before the L.A. Auto Show opens to the public., Once upon a time when a car company introduced a new car, it was a new new car., But at this year's L.A. Auto Show, you won't see any revolutionary new rides at least not on the outside. You'll find the same sameness in your grocery store parking lot. A lot of cars look alike. Why is that?, What they're relying on to distinguish these cars from one another is not so much the mechanical pieces of them or the design, says Brian Moody of Autotrader.com. They're selling sort of a lifestyle or an experience or a philosophy., Derrick Jenkins, head of design for Mazda, will reluctantly admit that there's been kind of a convergence in the way cars look., If you really line the silhouettes up and really check the dimensions and the width yeah, there's a lot of similarities, he says, because the basic architecture has been on a constant evolutionary path, and that's where the sweet spot exits., Jenkins says his job at Mazda is to hit that sweet spot and design cars that sell, so that's why you won't see cars with bubbles or giant fins., &ldquo; There are certain shapes that work better for lower aerodynamics. Lower aerodynamics means better fuel efficiency., - Aaron Bragman, IHS Automotive, If you're talking about a midsize sedan that you want to park in your driveway, if you really want some jet-looking fins on the back of it, probably most people I don't believe do, he says. I don't., But that doesn't really explain why cars look so much alike. What does explain the similarities, says Aaron Bragman with IHS Automotive, is aerodynamics., There are certain shapes that work better for lower aerodynamics, he says. Lower aerodynamics means better fuel efficiency., The race to make cars more fuel efficient means automakers spend a lot more time in wind tunnels to get that nearly universal sleek look., And Bragman says that as the auto industry gets more competitive, companies are a lot less likely to be all wild and crazy., The common denominator usually does sell best. This is why you'll see a Toyota Corolla, a Toyota Camry as best-selling vehicles. They're not stylistically wowing anybody, but they're decent, they're attractive, and they're not too crazy, he says. Not too crazy actually sells., Not too crazy means car shows aren't as fun and neither is car shopping., But here's the thing: Rebecca Lindland with IHS Automotive says midsize cars may look the same like the Camry, the Accord or the Fusion but there are not as many lemons., And it's really hard to tell the difference on the one hand, but also to know who's offering what in terms of how the car is to drive, because so many of the cars are just, they're so good, she says., Moody says we won't be wowed going to car shows looking at the outside of cars; the fun stuff is on the inside., The '50s version of the future was spaceships and gray jumpsuits and blinking lights that doesn't exist; there's no flying saucers. But there is Onstar and there is inTune and there is Pandora in your car, and there is an iPhone that plugs into it, and there is Bluetooth that lets me talk on the phone to my wife by just pressing a button and saying 'call home,' he says. That's pretty awesome., Moody says the future is here, and there's a good chance you're driving in it, right now.
Glen Osterberg (right) and another line cook at Lupa learn how to use the LeanPath waste tracking software., Glen Osterberg (right) and another line cook at Lupa learn how to use the LeanPath waste tracking software., Every year, restaurants throw away as much as 10 percent of the food they buy, as we reported yesterday, yet food waste ranks low on most chefs' list of priorities. But some restaurants want to do something about food waste in their quest to go green. That includes Mario Batali's Lupa Osteria Romana, one of New York's trendiest restaurants., A few years ago, the ponytailed Food Network star and his business partners decided that their 19 restaurants should rank among the greenest in the world. So they hired a director of food safety and sustainability to encourage chefs to buy local ingredients, compost and save energy., Then Batali's group heard about Andrew Shakman and his company, LeanPath. It was helping big institutions like Stanford University's dining halls and the MGM Grand Las Vegas save thousands of dollars in food costs with its waste tracking software., But the LeanPath software had never been tested in a small place like Lupa where the chefs cook everything to order. So Shakman agreed to let Lupa try the system without charge., For food that's expired, spoiled, overcooked or is trim waste, we're going to put [it] on this scale before it goes into the garbage or into the compost, Shakman told the Lupa cooks when he visited the kitchen earlier this year., When cooks put food waste on the LeanPath scale, they identify it and why they're throwing it away like overcooked meat or spoiled fish. The software then calculates what that food waste is worth. With that information, a kitchen can figure out how it needs to change, Shakman says. (Watch a demo of how it works here.), Mario Batali and his business partners want to make their 19 restaurants, including Lupa, among the greenest in the world., Mario Batali and his business partners want to make their 19 restaurants, including Lupa, among the greenest in the world., Once we begin reducing food waste, we are spending less money on food because we're not buying food to waste it; we're spending less money on labor; we're spending less money on energy to keep that food cold and heat it up; we're spending less on waste disposal, says Shakman., Lupa's Chef di Cuisine Cruz Goler spent a couple of months working with the system. But he ran into some problems. After the first week, some of his staff just stopped weighing the food. But Goler says he didn't want to break their chops about some sort of vegetable scrap that doesn't really mean anything., Shakman believes those scraps do mean something when they add up over time. He says it's just a matter of making the tracking a priority, even when a restaurant is really busy., When we get busy, we don't stop washing our hands; when we get busy, we don't cut corners in quality on the plate, says Shakman. So it's just a question of how do we adapt. And we've seen folks who find ways., But Goler couldn't find a way. He pulled the plug on the project., It was tough to take it seriously, he says, when most of what the restaurant throws away is stuff like onion skins that no one is ever going to eat. And he says forcing his staff to weigh onion skins took up precious time. His perspective: The manpower of weighing the onion skins was more costly than anything learned by doing it., It's a very low-margin, supercompetitive business. It's the crux of every environmental issue, Goler says., Despite the failure of LeanPath in the Lupa kitchen, Shakman is still convinced his system can save restaurants money., But he's learned that the battle against food waste, like so many battles people fight, has to start with winning hearts and minds.
Turboprop planes make up the entire fleet at Silver Airways. Airlines are increasingly using propeller planes to cut costs., Turboprop planes make up the entire fleet at Silver Airways. Airlines are increasingly using propeller planes to cut costs., Record-high fuel prices have hammered airlines, forcing executives to eliminate flights, cut back on unprofitable routes and make passengers pay for many perks that used to be free., Now the airlines are looking at other ways to save money. That means a new opportunity for a plane from the past., On a typical day at Atlanta's Hartsfield-Jackson International Airport, the Plane Train ferries some 200,000 travelers a day between terminals. One of those passengers, Rebecca Hamilton, is on her way home to Florida., American Airlines Fliers Fed Up As Labor Clash Rages, In Bankruptcy, American Airlines Looks At All Options, If I can do it economically, I fly out of Gainesville, she says., Often, she finds that affordable ticket on Delta Air Lines. Hamilton knows that always means two things: a connection through Atlanta, and at least part of her trip will be on a smaller, regional jet. But that's changing., Tonight, she's a bit surprised to board a plane branded Silver Airways. And it's not a regional jet. It has propellers something she has not seen in decades., Mostly I remember what other people say: that it's bouncier and that it's more turbulent and your stomach whooshes into your, you know, a little more often. But quite frankly, it takes a lot to make me feel scared and I just don't really mind it, Hamilton says., Outside, the propeller blades create a rhythmic ruckus as they chop through the air. Inside, it's only a faint drone. Ninety minutes later, Hamilton is on the ground in Gainesville, ready for her short drive home. The airplane she came in on is also home., These 34-seat Saab turboprops make up the entire Silver fleet. And each night at its 60,000-square-foot maintenance hangar at Gainesville's airport, crews check tires, landing gear and dozens of other components. Night maintenance supervisor Justin Hernandez is about to sign off on what looks like a new plane., Right now, to the left, Aircraft 352, that's our latest. Its aircraft name is Limitless. It just got here from conformity check, Hernandez says., That's the last step before rotating into the Silver fleet. Regional carrier Mesaba once flew this plane, first with Northwest Airlines' colors, and more recently, Delta's., Matthew Holiday, a vice president at Silver, says the carrier doesn't try to hide its turboprop fleet. Rather, it embraces it right down to the logo, which mimics a spinning propeller., We want to be clear in our messaging to consumers that this is a turboprop. But it's not a bad thing, Holiday says., Through the 1990s and 2000s, airlines replaced turboprops with faster regional jets. Jet fuel was about 87 cents per gallon. Now it's four times that much. Since turboprops use less fuel, flying one instead of a jet often means a profit instead of a loss. So expect to see more, says Regional Airline Association President Roger Cohen., After a steady decline in the ratio of turboprops to jets in the regional fleet, we've just seen here over the last year, year and a half, the first time that line started to move in the other direction, Cohen says., The Federal Aviation Administration forecasts regional jets with fewer than 40 seats will disappear from fleets by 2015. This comes as reliance on larger turboprop aircraft doubles in the next decade. And with new technology that cancels most noise and vibration, they won't be your grandfather's turboprop.
Shoppers at a Target store in Westbury, N.Y., last week. Consumer spending drives the economy. And the holiday shopping season is crucial for retailers., Shoppers at a Target store in Westbury, N.Y., last week. Consumer spending drives the economy. And the holiday shopping season is crucial for retailers., The nation's economy expanded at a measured pace in recent weeks, the Federal Reserve Board reports in its latest anecdotal look at how things are going across the U.S., The central bank's Beige Book review of conditions in its 12 bank districts finds that:, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco grew at a modest pace, while St. Louis and Minneapolis indicated a somewhat stronger increase in activity. In contrast, Boston reported a slower rate of growth., Weaker conditions in New York were attributed to widespread disruptions at the end of October and into November caused by Hurricane Sandy. Philadelphia reported general weakness that was exacerbated by the hurricane. However, in the Boston and Richmond Districts, the storm's effects were mostly limited. Contacts in a number of Districts expressed concern and uncertainty about the federal budget, especially the fiscal cliff., All told, the report seems to add to the evidence that the economy continues to slowly move along not fast enough to bring unemployment down significantly, but just strong enough to keep unemployment from rising., The Beige Book (named for the color of its cover) is prepared eight times a year for meetings of Fed policymakers. It is based on interviews with employers and others around the country., On the key issue of consumer spending, the Fed says it:, Increased at a moderate pace in most Districts in recent weeks, with mixed reports from Dallas. In New York, sales were ahead of plan prior to Hurricane Sandy, and merchants expect to recoup sales lost during the storm as residents replace destroyed or damaged property., Philadelphia contacts reported slower growth since the last report. Apparel sales picked up in Boston, and Richmond indicated that home and garden stores reported stronger sales ahead of Hurricane Sandy., Durable goods sales varied across Districts. For example, Boston and Chicago noted an improvement in furniture, while sales in that category declined in Cleveland. Chicago reported flattening in electronics sales, whereas San Francisco contacts reported significant sales gains for consumer technology products.
The Deepwater Horizon oil rig burned on April 21, 2010., Citing a lack of business integrity, the Environmental Protection Agency announced it was temporarily suspending the oil giant BP from entering into new contracts with the federal government., In a press release, the EPA said BP demonstrated the lack of integrity during the Deepwater Horizon blowout, explosion, oil spill and response. This kind of suspension, the EPA explained, is standard practice when a responsibility question is raised by action in a criminal case., Earlier this month, as we reported, BP agreed to plead guilty to criminal misconduct and agreed to pay a record $4 billion in criminal penalties., The BP suspension will temporarily prevent the company and the named affiliates from getting new federal government contracts, grants or other covered transactions until the company can provide sufficient evidence to EPA demonstrating that it meets Federal business standards, the EPA said. The suspension does not affect existing agreements BP may have with the government., The Houston Chronicle's Loren Steffy, a business columnist, says that the suspension, however, could affect BP's ability to get new leases to drill in the Gulf of Mexico and could affect the extension of some of the existing leases., The London-based oil giant is the largest leaseholder in the deep-water Gulf of Mexico, with more than 700 leases, and it is the gulf's largest producer of oil and gas from more than 20 fields there, The Washington Post reports., The Post adds that generally these kinds of suspensions are limited to 18 months., Steffy notes:, It's not clear what the financial impact will be, but the decision sends a strong message to BP as well as other companies operating in the Gulf about the importance of process safety. The EPA was designated as the lead federal agency in making the determination for the suspension. In making it's decision, its done what federal regulators with the Bureau of Safety and Environmental Enforcement have steadfastly refused to do: hold operators economically accountable for their actions.
A sold sign at a new home site in Danville, Calif., earlier this year., A sold sign at a new home site in Danville, Calif., earlier this year., Sales of new homes edged down 0.3 percent in October from September, but were a healthy 17.2 percent above the pace of October 2011, the Census Bureau and Department of Housing and Urban Development report., It's another in a recent series of reports that signal the housing sector is on the mend. But, as Bloomberg News says, the improvement has been somewhat uneven., According to the agencies, new homes sold at an annual rate of 368,000 last month., One thing to keep in mind: Superstorm Sandy struck just as the month was ending and that may have affected the sales pace.
Mine helmets and painted crosses at the entrance to Massey Energy's Upper Big Branch coal mine, as a memorial to the 29 miners killed there., Mine helmets and painted crosses at the entrance to Massey Energy's Upper Big Branch coal mine, as a memorial to the 29 miners killed there., Federal prosecutors in West Virginia stepped higher up the corporate ladder at Massey Energy Wednesday with new criminal charges stemming from the investigation of the 2010 coal mine explosion that killed 29 workers., David C. Hughart was president of Massey's Green Valley Resource Group, a major coal mining subsidiary based in Leivasy, W. Va., from 2000 to 2010., He has agreed to plead guilty to the charges and is cooperating with the investigation, U.S. Attorney Booth Goodwin announced this morning., Hughart is now charged in a federal criminal information with two counts of conspiracy. Neither count is directly tied to the explosion two years ago at Massey's Upper Big Branch mine. But the charges target the corporate culture that allegedly led to the nation's worst mine disaster in 40 years., Prosecutors say Hughart conspired with other unnamed Massey officials to thwart surprise inspections by the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA). Hughart is accused of authorizing and facilitating advance warnings to miners underground when MSHA inspectors arrived unannounced at several Massey mines., The charging document says the advance warnings caused the concealing and covering up of violations of mine safety and health laws that otherwise would result in citations and orders that could have slowed or halted coal production., The alleged inspection dodge kept inspectors from discovering inadequate use of ventilation control devices and failure to control explosive methane gas and coal dust., Inadequate ventilation, uncontrolled methane gas and excessive coal dust were major factors in the Upper Big Branch explosion., Hughart is also charged with conspiracy to violate mandatory health and safety standards that are designed to prevent mine explosions and minimize exposure to the coal mine dust that causes the deadly respiratory disease known as black lung., Mine safety and health laws were routinely violated at mines managed by Hughart and other coal mines owned by Massey, according to the charging document., Hughart and Massey believed that consistently following those laws would decrease coal production, the document adds., The alleged conspiracy kept the company from being exposed to possible fines, criminal penalties, and patterns of violation status, which would have triggered more regulatory scrutiny., Prosecutors typically file charges using a criminal information document when the defendant has accepted a plea agreement and is a cooperating witness., Hughart's role in the company put him in regular contact with higher-level executives, including former CEO Don Blankenship, former chief operating officer Chris Adkins and former safety chief Elizabeth Chamberlin., A lower level Massey official pleaded guilty in March to similar charges involving advance warning of inspections. Gary May was a foreman at the Upper Big Branch mine and his sentencing has been postponed as he continues to work with prosecutors., The broader conspiracy charge against Hughart is a novel approach and indicates an attempt to test possible criminal charges against more senior officials. Mining company executives are rarely charged when miners die in accidents., The broader charge also sends signals to former Massey executives higher up the corporate chain. It shows that prosecutors are willing to be creative as they consider more criminal charges., Massey Energy was absorbed by Alpha Natural Resources last year. In December, Alpha agreed to pay nearly $210 million for fines, victims' compensation and industry safety programs. The agreement kept the company from facing corporate criminal charges for the Upper Big Branch disaster but did not preclude prosecution of individual Massey officials., Update at 12:30 p.m. ET. More About Hughart:, Reporting by Ken Ward Jr. in The Charleston Gazette includes more background on Hughart., Ward writes that documents unsealed in a court action jointly launched by The Gazette and NPR show that Hughart was fired by Massey in March 2010, just a few weeks before the Upper Big Branch explosion., The internal company documents allege that Hughart failed a drug test, seemed to be having financial difficulty, hired and promoted his son to an $89,000 a year job, gave his son use of a company truck and received kickbacks from a contractor., Ward also recounts an earlier MSHA investigation of the Massey subsidiary Hughart managed. They found that mine officials were not conducting pre-shift safety examinations, but were filling out paperwork as if they had done so, Ward reports., Federal and independent investigators reported the same behavior at the Upper Big Branch mine before the massive explosion there., Hughart is also named in a ruling by the National Labor Relations Board citing Massey for violating federal labor law when the company refused to rehire union workers when the company bought union mines., Ward also notes that public records indicate Hughart worked for Massey for more than 20 years, holding executive positions for more than a dozen different subsidiaries., Former CEO Don Blankenship was known for micro-managing the company's mines and subsidiaries. Documents obtained by NPR and others disclosed in the Upper Big Branch investigation show that Blankenship kept careful track of each mine's coal production and any delays., Hughart's management responsibilities at the company and Blankenship's tight management style indicate that Hughart might have valuable information for prosecutors. But the problems laid out in the internal Massey documents may give defense attorneys room to challenge Hughart's credibility during a trial., U.S. Attorney Booth Goodwin acknowledges that potential problem but tells NPR we're never going to go to court with just one witness to this activity., Goodwin also says Hughart's role at Massey was significant. He is very possibly the highest-ranking coal executive ever charged in an investigation of this nature, he adds., Update at 11:15 a.m. ET. The Court Document And A Comment From The U.S. Attorney:, We've put the court filing online. Also, in a statement sent to reporters Goodwin had this to say: Miners deserve a safe place to earn a living. Some mine officials, unfortunately, seem to believe health and safety laws are optional. That attitude has no place in the mining industry or any industry. Today's charges reinforce that urgent message.
Donald Desmond teaches Abdesa Bustina to use a computer at the New Haven Adult and Continuing Education Center. The new GED will be offered only on computer, but many students here don't know how to use one., Donald Desmond teaches Abdesa Bustina to use a computer at the New Haven Adult and Continuing Education Center. The new GED will be offered only on computer, but many students here don't know how to use one., When Toni Walker is not in Hartford, Conn., serving as a state representative, she can usually be found at the New Haven Adult and Continuing Education Center., We basically educate approximately 800 people a day, says Walker, an assistant principal at the center. It is open enrollment, so when somebody gets an epiphany and says, 'I need to get my high school diploma so that I can get a job,' they can walk through the doors, and they can get [their GED] here., From 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., the center's classes are packed with people preparing to take the GED test. Steve Cober, a union carpenter for two decades, is one of them. I come here to try to get my GED to go into ... something different than carpentry. Medical field or something like that, he says., For years, the GED has offered millions of people like Cober a low-cost second chance at a high school equivalency diploma. The test is updated every decade or so, but some particularly significant changes are planned for 2014., &ldquo; People come here with pennies and nickels, bringing us change to pay for their GED. So it's going to be a class issue., - Connecticut state Rep. Toni Walker, A Pricier Exam, Last year, the GED Testing Service part of the nonprofit American Council on Education announced that it was merging with Pearson, a for-profit British company, and one of the largest educational testing companies in the world., The merger, the testing service says, would help to generate the money needed to revamp the test. The new assessment will be more rigorous and aligned with Common Core Standards, a set of uniform educational standards now adopted by almost every state. The test will be offered only on computer, and it will cost more., Fees to take the exam vary by state, says Randy Trask, president of the GED Testing Service., Administrators at the adult education center are concerned that the GED overhaul will make it harder for many test takers to complete the exam., Administrators at the adult education center are concerned that the GED overhaul will make it harder for many test takers to complete the exam., Historically, states have chosen to subsidize the GED test; some partially and some in its entirety, Trask says. The state then chooses what to charge test takers for the test. And the state bears or has historically born all of the costs associated with the delivery of that test and the scoring., In Connecticut, it currently costs $13 to take the GED. The actual price of the exam is closer to $60, but the state subsidizes the balance. The price of the new test, however, will jump to $120. And though Connecticut may pick up the difference for a while, state Rep. Walker says that probably won't last. As a result, she's worried the higher cost will hurt the low-income people the test is supposed to help., It is going to be prohibitive ... People come here with pennies and nickels, bringing us change to pay for their GED, Walker says. So it's going to be a class issue. People who have no money will never be able to actually take the GED., A Digital Divide, The New Haven Adult and Continuing Education Center has begun to ramp up its computer capabilities to prepare for the online exam. But Walker says the change presents another hurdle to students here: Fewer than 20 percent of them have computers at home., So if we don't show them how to use a computer, they're never going to be able to pass the GED, because they won't be able to do it online and that's the way they're going to be delivering the test, Walker says., Though the GED is by far America's most popular high school equivalency credential, states are starting to explore other options. New York, for example, has put out a request for proposals to companies that might be able to create an alternative test., Meanwhile, the new GED is scheduled to replace the current exam in January 2014.
Denzel Washington plays Whip Whitaker in Flight., Denzel Washington plays Whip Whitaker in Flight., At one point in the film Flight, alcoholic pilot William Whip Whitaker, played by Denzel Washington, peers into a hotel-room mini-fridge filled with pretty much every type of wine and liquor imaginable., The shot showcases wine brands Yellow Tail, Barefoot, Sutter Home, plus Amstel Light and Heineken beers even Red Bull., This scene raised a lot of questions for me: When has any hotel minibar ever contained so much alcohol? Why has Denzel done three films focusing on transportation - two trains and now a plane in as many years?, And how did all of these alcohol brands get so much screen time?, I imagined two possible behind-the-scenes processes: hordes of lawyers and interns making calls to Ciroc and Tanqueray asking for permission, or Ketel One paying Paramount Pictures lots of money to be featured. But it turns out that neither of these processes necessarily happened. Many of the beverage companies didn't even know their products would be featured in the film, and some of them aren't happy about it., A screenshot from the trailer of Flight, showing the fully stocked (some would say too fully stocked) minibar., A screenshot from the trailer of Flight, showing the fully stocked (some would say too fully stocked) minibar., Anheuser-Busch said a couple of weeks ago that it has asked Paramount Pictures to obscure or remove Budweiser logos from DVD and On Demand versions of the film. The makers of Stolichnaya vodka have also asked that references to its brand be removed. Rob McCarthy, vice president of Budweiser, told the Associated Press that the company wasn't contacted by Paramount and did not grant permission for the use of the brand., And as it turns out, they didn't have to., It's not something you're legally required to do, says Daniel Nazer, a resident fellow at Stanford Law School's Fair Use Project. There's a big distinction between the culture of the content industry and the law., Nazer explains that the law doesn't extend to every situation that anyone imagines it might cover. Trademark law ... exists to stop me selling my soda and calling it Coke; it doesn't exist to stop me making a TV show where one of the characters happens to have a can of Coke in his or her hands, he says., But why would the Paramount want to give brands screen time without getting paid? In this case, it was pretty essential to the plot. It was important for viewers to see Denzel drinking the same brands they see behind the bar., And if you think about it, why would any beverage company want to pay to have their brand portrayed in a film where alcohol is a villain?, Much of this whether a manufacturer will pay for its products to be shown at one extreme or will demand that they not be shown on the other has to do with exactly how the product is portrayed. Heineken signed a reported $45 million partnership to have its beer featured in Skyfall. While fans may be disappointed that Bond is trading in his shaken, not stirred martini for the bottled beverage, it's not surprising that the beer company wanted to invest in the film. Bond makes alcohol seem cool; Flight makes it seem menacing., When product placement works this way, companies get contractual agreements, input and control. This is why we see Taco Bell Star Wars cups or Heineken commercials starring 007., Of course, the partnerships companies actively pursue don't always work out either. Reebok provided TriStar with more than $1.5 million worth of merchandise, marketing and other goodies to basically be one of the stars of the 1996 sports film Jerry Maguire. According to Reebok, there was a specific agreement about how the brand would be portrayed, and a full commercial for Reebok was supposed to be embedded in the film. That commercial, which showcases the company in a positive light, ended up on the cutting room floor, while an angry tirade that included broadsides against Reebok was kept in., Reebok took the case to court and got an undisclosed amount of money in an out-of-court settlement. When the film aired on TV, the commercial was back in., It's a very tricky industry, says Cristel Russell, assistant professor of marketing at American University. If a company produces a commercial, they know exactly what's going to be in the commercial. Product placement is very different. The movie people will always claim creative freedom., It may seem a lot easier for companies to advertise the old-fashioned way, but sometimes product placement really, really works. The tactic became a phenomenon thanks to an extraterrestrial fellow who hit the big screen in 1982. When E.T. follows a path of Reese's Pieces and meets little Elliot for a first time, the little orange, yellow and brown bits get lots of screen time. Steven Spielberg originally wanted to use M&Ms;, but M&M; Mars declined. The loss for Mars was the best thing that could have happened to Hershey. Sales of Reese's Pieces spiked, and that may well be the reason we still see them in stores decades later., Now, one more thing about Flight. If you're watching this movie with a newly tuned eye for product placement, you may notice that the film uses real alcohol brands, but a fictional brand of cigarettes. And it's not just this film: fans of Breaking Bad know that Jesse typically smokes the fictional Wilmington brand., That's because cigarettes open up a whole different can of worms because of the 1998 Tobacco Master Settlement Agreement, where the major U.S. tobacco companies agreed to stop certain marketing practices., Alcohol is the next frontier, says Russell, who's working with the National Institutes of Health to study the effect of alcohol product placement on teenagers. Of course for beverage companies, the advantage of product placement involving alcohol is that they can get around some of the demographic constraints and unofficially target people under 21. It's safe to say plenty of teenagers will see James Bond drinking those Heinekens, after all., We'll have to wait until the DVDs come out to see whether a drunk Denzel is still behind the wheel with a Bud in hand, or whether he's been given some blurry, ambiguous brand. Companies who have taken cases like this to court in recent years haven't been successful. Slip 'N Slide unsuccessfully sued Paramount in 2003 over a scene in the David Spade film Dickie Roberts: Former Child Star that makes their product seem like a death trap. Caterpillar wasn't able to get its logos removed from tractors driven by villains in George of the Jungle 2., So for all of the movies and shows that black out Apple logos on the back of what is obviously a MacBook, or cover up all of the labels on water bottles, Nazer says that's not necessary., The fact that [companies] can pay for control doesn't mean they have the right to control. And I think that's what leads to a lot of the confusion., When you do see covered labels or blotted out brand names, it may be because producers are trying to just avoid situations like this altogether., The reality is that ... if you get sued, you probably still have to pay for your own legal fees, Nazer says. I think that is part of [the] explanation about why so many studios are so reluctant to include real-world items in their productions. They're not worried that these suits are legitimate, they're just worried about the hassle., Meanwhile, I'm off to shoot a short film featuring every brand ever. Do you think anyone will mind?
If they're confident, they will shop: Two women carry shopping bags down Manhattan's 34th St. last week., If they're confident, they will shop: Two women carry shopping bags down Manhattan's 34th St. last week., There was a moderate increase in American consumers' confidence this month, the private Conference Board just reported., Its widely watched consumer confidence index rose to 73.7 from 73.1 in October. The index is the highest it has been since February 2008, when the economy had just fallen into recession and was headed down., The index is closely watched, of course, because consumers buy about 70 percent of all the goods and services produced. So if they're feeling more confident, that could mean good things for the economy., This could also be a sign that the holiday shopping season, which appears to have gotten off to a pretty good start, will be strong.
A sold sign at a housing development in Boca Raton, Fla., earlier this month., A sold sign at a housing development in Boca Raton, Fla., earlier this month., The nation's housing market continues to improve, according to the latest look at home prices across the nation from the analysts who put together the S&P;/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices., Home prices rose in the third quarter, marking the sixth consecutive month of increasing prices, David Blitzer, chairman of the Index Committee at S&P; Dow Jones Indices, says in the report, which was released this morning. In September, he adds, all three headline composites and 17 of the 20 cities gained over their levels of a year ago. Month-over-month, 13 cities and both Composites posted positive monthly gains., According to Blitzer, Phoenix continues to lead the recovery with a 20.4 percent annual growth rate. ... At the other end of the spectrum, Chicago and New York were the only two cities to post annual declines of 1.5 percent and 2.3 percent respectively and were also down 0.6 percent and 0.1 percent month-over-month., According to the report, here's what home prices have done in the past year:, Atlanta, up 0.1 percentBoston, up 1.9 percentCharlotte, up 3.5 percentChicago, down 1.5 percentCleveland, up 1.4 percent, Dallas, up 4.4 percentDenver, up 6.7 percentDetroit, up 7.6 percentLas Vegas, up 3.8 percentLos Angeles, up 4.0 percent, Miami, up 7.4 percentMinneapolis, up 8.8 percentNew York, down 2.3 percentPhoenix, up 20.4 percentPortland, up 3.7 percent, San Diego, up 4.1 percentSan Francisco, up 7.5 percentSeattle, up 4.8 percentTampa, up 5.9 percentWashington, D.C., up 3.2 percent, 10-city composite, up 2.1 percent20- city composite, up 3.0 percent, Today's news follows other recent reports about rising home prices and sales., The other economic indicator so far this morning is also positive: The Census Bureau says orders for so-called durable goods such as planes and appliances rose slightly in October from September. It was the fifth monthly increase in the past six months., Later the private Conference Board is due to release its latest consumer confidence index.
Nov. 7: A protester wrapped in a Greek flag stands in front of the parliament in Athens. Today's agreement may not bring an end to anti-austerity protests in Greece., Nov. 7: A protester wrapped in a Greek flag stands in front of the parliament in Athens. Today's agreement may not bring an end to anti-austerity protests in Greece., There's some good news this morning about the country that's come to symbolize Europe's financial problems and the efforts of leaders to shore up their common economy:, &mdash; After two false starts in as many weeks, international lenders on Tuesday finally reached a deal to overhaul Greece's faltering bailout program, sending European equity markets higher in morning trading. (The Financial Times), &mdash; In the early hours of Tuesday, Greece's euro partners and the International Monetary Fund agreed to release vital loan payments totaling some $57 billion and introduce a series of measures designed to reduce the country's massive debts to a more manageable level within a decade. These include reducing the interest rates Greece has to pay on the loans and a still-vague bond buyback program. (The Associated Press), Reuters adds that the deal is a breakthrough that should keep Greece's near-bankrupt economy afloat., The AP cautions, though, that though the deal avoids an imminent bankruptcy of Greece, the country still has to implement wide-ranging cuts and reforms in the months and years ahead. Many in the markets think that will be too much for a country that's about to enter its sixth year of recession and a society struggling to cope with rising poverty levels and an unemployment rate of 25 percent., And correspondent Joanna Kakissis, who is in Athens, tells us that the ink was barely dry on the agreement when Greek opposition politicians criticized it as a 'half-baked solution' that will keep Greece chained to years of austerity and recession. There have been many protests in Greece in recent months over the austerity measures being taken there., According to the FT, the centerpiece of the agreement is the change in interest rates on Greek bailout loans. Bilateral loans provided to Athens under its first bailout would be cut 100 basis points, to just 50 points above interbank rates., There's a Europgroup statement with more details of the deal posted here., Teri Schultz reporting on the deal for the NPR Newscast
The National Restaurant Association says getting restaurants to focus on the food waste problem is a big challenge., The National Restaurant Association says getting restaurants to focus on the food waste problem is a big challenge., A row of restaurants in the Cleveland Park neighborhood of Washington, D.C., looks tantalizing there's Vietnamese, Italian, New American., But if you walk around to the alley at the back of this row you might gag. Dumpsters packed with trash are lined up, and they get emptied only twice a week. Which means a lot of food sits here, filling the block with a deep, rank odor., Some of the Dumpsters aren't properly sealed, so grease and putrid juices are pooling beneath them. They may attract pigeons, rats, cockroaches, ants or flies, says Robert Corrigan, who runs the New York Rodent Control Academy. The academy trains restaurant workers on how to keep pests away. He says Dumpsters filled with restaurant garbage are one of the main reasons pests are multiplying across the country., Even a half a lemon that drops off a Dumpster and rolls underneath a stairwell tiny flies will lay hundreds of thousands of eggs on that half a lemon, says Corrigan., Even when the Dumpsters are emptied, the problem of food waste is just moved somewhere else. Dump trucks transport thousands of tons of food waste every day to landfills. That's where food waste becomes Jean Schwab's problem., Food waste is huge, says Schwab, a senior analyst in the waste division at the Environmental Protection Agency. Food waste is now the No. 1 material that goes into landfills and incinerators., Schwab says food waste from restaurants makes up 15 percent of all the food that ends up in landfills. And all that food doesn't just take up space and attract pests it's also changing the climate., Because it rots so fast, basically it starts to generate methane really quickly, says Schwab., Methane is a greenhouse gas that's 20 times more potent than carbon dioxide. And reducing methane emissions from sources like landfills is one of the Environmental Protection Agency's biggest priorities in the fight against climate change., But in spite of the fact that as much as 10 percent of the food a restaurant buys ends up in landfills, hardly anyone in the restaurant industry gives it a second thought., It's just another thing we're used to as a restaurant professional ... the amount of garbage that's thrown out on a nightly basis, says Cruz Goler, head chef at Lupa, an Italian restaurant owned by Mario Batali in New York City. It can be a little staggering, I guess, but that's just what happens., Back in Cleveland Park, Logan Cox, executive chef of Ripple restaurant, says chefs obsess over the quality of their vegetables and their technique. They want to make sure everything looks and tastes just right. But food waste comes in low on the long list of priorities., I've never taken the time to weigh or measure how much we do throw away, says Cox., According to Jonathan Bloom, who wrote a book last year called American Wasteland, consumers are part of the problem, too. There's about a half-pound of food waste created per meal served, says Bloom. That's taking into account both back- and front-of-the-house waste. So restaurants and the customers are both joining forces to waste a whole lot of food. (Listen to a recent interview with him on Science Friday.), About three cents of every dollar consumers spend on food away from home ends up in the trash. And that doesn't even include the food left on your plate or the slimy lettuce forgotten in the fridge., Chris Moyer of the National Restaurant Association says getting restaurants to focus on food waste is a big challenge. Food scraps, of course, are inevitable, but a lot of food waste is still edible., The hardest part for many restaurants may just be getting the workers to become aware of how much edible food they waste every day. A few years ago, when Moyer was managing a big chain restaurant, he wanted to show his cooks there were plenty of opportunities to reduce waste. So he took away the garbage can., You'd be surprised, once you take away the garbage cans, if people have to ask permission to throw something away how little you throw away, says Moyer. It was really quite amazing., But Moyer says getting the whole industry to take on food waste is going to take a lot of training and education that's what the NRA is trying to do with its ConServe program. And as we've reported, Unilever's food division now has a program called United Against Waste., But habits are harder to change than the menu., The hardest part about doing anything to benefit the planet, benefit your bottom line is behavioral change, says Moyer. Because that's really what we're talking about changing mindsets, changing behaviors.
A grand bargain, a compromise to avert the so-called fiscal cliff, could all come down to one word: revenue. It's now widely agreed that steering away from the cliff the combination of spending cuts and tax increases set to hit at the start of the year will require some combination of revenue increases and spending cuts. The central sticking point could well be whether President Obama and Congress can agree on the definition of revenue., At the moment, the casual observer could easily get the sense that the president and Republicans in Congress are talking past each other., I think there's a growing consensus a consensus that has long existed, but growing now in places that weren't always fertile for growth, that we have to do this in a balanced way and that revenue has to be part of it, White House spokesman Jay Carney said Monday., Meanwhile, Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., said on the Senate floor Monday that Republicans have stepped out of their comfort zone by agreeing to talk about revenue., We've been open to revenue by closing loopholes as long as it's tied to spending cuts and pro-growth tax reform that broadens the base and lowers rates, he said., Talk Of Compromise, Now, the translation: When White House officials talk about revenue, they mean allowing the Bush-era tax cuts to expire for the wealthy. Under the president's definition of revenue, the richest 2 percent would see their top tax rate rise to 39 percent, and he'd also limit deductions and cut out loopholes. That's simply not what McConnell and many of his fellow Republicans mean., But at this point in the negotiations, no one is saying that at least not publicly. Instead, there's been a lot of talk of compromise from lawmakers like Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., I remain optimistic that when it comes to our economy and when it comes to protecting middle-class families from a whopping tax hike come Jan. 1, that Democrats and Republicans will be able to find common ground, he said Monday., Opposition To Tax Increases, The ability to find common ground may depend on just one man's definition of revenue a man not in the White House or the Capitol. He's anti-tax lobbyist Grover Norquist, and he's gotten the vast majority of Republicans to sign a pledge saying they will oppose any and all tax increases. A few signatories have recently come out saying they won't be bound by the pledge, but Norquist made it clear Monday on Fox News that they do so at their own peril., We could ask President Bush, George Herbert Walker Bush, how his second term went after he broke his pledge, he said., Those comments might explain why many in Washington are brainstorming ways to raise revenues without, strictly speaking, raising tax rates. Those ideas include capping deductions for the wealthy, more broadly limiting deductions, and possibly even making the wealthy pay the top tax rate on every dollar they earn., David Kamin, an assistant professor of law at New York University, was involved in last year's debt-ceiling negotiations as a special assistant to the president., It's a possible place where people could maybe get to a compromise. It's also a classic move, Kamin says, where one side says they don't want to increase the statutory rate, but the other side says maybe there's a way we could kind of do it in a different way that doesn't increase the statutory rate but gets us to the same place., Falling Over The Fiscal Cliff, He says it's both mathematically and politically impossible to get all the revenue needed through closing loopholes and capping deductions while also lowering rates, which is what Republicans are calling for., But unlike last year's debt ceiling negotiations, Democrats are the ones with the ultimate trump card, says Rep. Chris Van Hollen, D-Md., a member of the House Budget Committee., If they don't put any additional revenue on the table, the fiscal cliff is going to deliver more revenue than anybody wants, he says., That revenue will come from automatic tax increases on just about everyone if Congress and the president don't work something out by the end of the year.
Johnny Galecki and Jim Parsons in The Big Bang Theory, one of Chuck Lorre's three popular comedies currently on CBS., Johnny Galecki and Jim Parsons in The Big Bang Theory, one of Chuck Lorre's three popular comedies currently on CBS., On Tuesday's Morning Edition, NPR's Neda Ulaby has a story about Chuck Lorre, the producer whose name is attached to three of the five highest-rated comedies on American television last season: The Big Bang Theory, Two And A Half Men, and Mike &amp; Molly. (Mike &amp; Molly is both the newest of these shows and the underachiever, being only the fifth highest-rated comedy and the twenty-ninth highest-rated show on all of broadcast prime-time television in total viewers for the 2011-12 season.) Men and Big Bang are both massive syndicated moneymakers, to the point where TBS has been very nearly rejuvenated just by being able to boast the rights to the latter and FX has been so boosted by the former that it signed on to air ex-Man Charlie Sheen's Anger Management., Lorre probably got his biggest dose of public exposure during the Sheen epic, which culminated in the star leaving Two And A Half Men, seeing his character emphatically killed off and literally burned to ashes that were then thrown in the air, and being replaced by Ashton Kutcher. But Lorre has been around sitcoms for much, much longer than that. He worked on Roseanne and produced the reasonably well regarded Grace Under Fire, the clearly troubled Cybill, and the very sweet Dharma &amp; Greg. Those particularly if you combine them into a body of work with the three Lorre works on now are actually very, very different shows, despite the fact that they all have, to varying degrees, a pretty traditional sitcom feel., In one sense, there is a Chuck Lorre brand; call it 50 percent sweet and 50 percent vulgar, plus or minus 30 percent depending on the show, or possibly the comedy that the plurality of Americans like, whether you personally think it's clever or not, or possibly comedy for people who hate critics. (In fairness, both the leads on Mike &amp; Molly and the cast of The Big Bang Theory are often spoken of kindly even in critical circles, even when the shows they're on are less so.) But in another sense, Lorre executes a kind of comedy that can vary enormously in both tone and quality in part because he created these shows with different collaborators., Two And A Half Men is a product largely of Lorre's collaboration with Lee Aronsohn, who was behind the enough lady jokes! controversy that happened this spring. Aronsohn displayed at that time (and essentially acknowledged) a distrust of women that comes through loud and clear on the show, which he agreed during that controversy is about damaged men and the women responsible. Men remains a pretty nasty, angry show, and by far the one with the most consistently juvenile sensibility. The Big Bang Theory is much warmer and more optimistic about humanity. It was co-created by Lorre and Bill Prady, who used to work for of all people Jim Henson, and whose Twitter chatter is with people like Wil Wheaton and other geek superstars. Mike &amp; Molly, which has a genuinely sweet romance at its center and some very brittle supporting characters, was co-created by Lorre and Mark Roberts, who used to write for Men but uses a much lighter tone these days., All three shows come from the Lorre machine, and there are rhythms and stylistic qualities in common. Lorre is effectively the primary architect of what became the distinctive feel of CBS comedy in the post-Everybody Loves Raymond era. But the three shows are actually quite different, aside from the basic fact that they're all popular (two of them are massively so) and none of them are critical darlings.
The no-questions-asked return policy of the Kohl's department store chain helped it win a spot on the Naughty and Nice list compiled by Consumer Reports., The no-questions-asked return policy of the Kohl's department store chain helped it win a spot on the Naughty and Nice list compiled by Consumer Reports., For holiday shoppers, retailers' approach to fees, returns and other practices can bring praise or anger. And when customers rant or rave, Consumer Reports takes note and compiles them into its annual Naughty and Nice list of companies., They're policies and practices that people either felt were consumer-friendly or not, Consumer Reports senior editor Tod Marks tells NPR's Steve Inskeep. He adds that the list isn't related to the ratings his magazine is known for., The list includes 20 widely known companies such as grocery stores Publix and Safeway (nice), and airlines Delta and Spirit (naughty)., The naughty offenses range from BMW and other carmakers' omission of spare tires in new models, and the clothing chain Forever 21's two separate policies for online and in-store returns., Of particular note in this holiday season, retailer Abe's of Maine was criticized for the many exceptions to its 30-day money-back guarantee. Marks says that under the policy, the seller of electronics and appliances doesn't include microwaves, watches, TVs, laptops and other items., The Naughty and Nice list reflects the opinions of Consumer Reports experts, along with the magazine's Facebook friends, Twitter followers and online subscribers, Marks says., Really, people are just so frustrated, he says. And they're primarily frustrated because of the inability, or an unwillingness on the part of a lot of companies, to just simply listen to them., On the Nice list, the return policies at Kohl's and Nordstrom came in for praise, as did the all-inclusive pricing of the Drury Hotel chain., The Red Wing Shoe Co. was commended for allowing no-questions-asked returns of its boots. And PNC Bank won fans for offering a simple, unglamorous product: a free basic checking account, with no minimum balance., Marks adds that a spot on the Naughty and Nice list doesn't necessarily mean a company is making a bad product., Oftentimes, we see companies that do very well in our survey, maybe they'll pop up on the naughty list, Marks says. And conversely, we'll see companies that don't do so well sometimes have a nice policy ... We've got the good, the bad, and the ugly.
Intrade, the prediction website that accepted bids on, among other things, the result of the presidential election, is shutting its operations to U.S. customers. The move came Monday just hours after the Commodity Futures Trading Commission accused the Ireland-based company of violating the agency's ban on off-exchange options trading., Here's more from Intrade's news release announcing the move:, We are sorry to announce that due to legal and regulatory pressures, Intrade can no longer allow US residents to participate in our real-money prediction markets., Unfortunately this means that all US residents must begin the process of closing down their Intrade accounts. We strongly urge you to begin this process immediately., In its statement, Intrade called the move a surprise and a disappointment., The company's decision followed the CFTC's decision to file a complaint in federal court in Washington, D.C., alleging that Intrade and Trade Exchange Network Ltd., or TEN, made false statements about the website in documents filed with the agency., Here's more from the CFTC statement:, Specifically, according to the complaint, from September 2007 to June 25, 2012, Intrade and TEN operated an online 'prediction market' trading website, which allowed U.S. customers to trade options products prohibited by the CFTC's ban on off-exchange options trading. Through the website, Intrade and TEN allegedly unlawfully solicited and permitted U.S. customers to buy and sell options predicting whether specific future events would occur, including whether certain U.S. economic numbers or the prices of gold and currencies would reach a certain level by a certain future date, and whether specific acts of war would occur by a certain future date., The CFTC's complaint also charges Intrade and TEN with knowingly filing false 'Annual Certification' forms with the CFTC stating that Intrade limited its options offerings to eligible market participants. Contrary to these representations, the complaint alleges that Intrade unlawfully solicited and permitted retail U.S. customers to buy and sell off-exchange options on the website., In addition, the complaint alleges that TEN violated an order issued by the CFTC in 2005 that found that TEN had previously engaged in similar conduct and ordered TEN to cease and desist from violating the Commodity Exchange Act and CFTC regulations, as charged., David Meister, the director of the CFTC's Division of Enforcement, said it's illegal for Americans to buy and sell commodity options unless they are listed for trading and traded on a CFTC-registered exchange., The requirement for on-exchange trading is important for a number of reasons, including that it enables the CFTC to police market activity and protect market integrity, he said in the statement. Today's action should make it clear that we will intervene in the 'prediction' markets, wherever they may be based, when their U.S. activities violate the Commodity Exchange Act or the CFTC's regulations., The Associated Press reports that TEN settled similar charges of soliciting American investors in 2005. Here's more from the AP story:, In an order filed with that settlement, the CFTC said that U.S. customers accounted for up to 40 percent of Intrade's total customer base. TEN paid $150,000 and agreed to halt further violations., Under the settlement, TEN agreed to use pop-up windows to tell U.S. customers which bets were not available to them. It said it would cooperate in any future investigations., Intrade accepts bets on a wide variety of topics. Most recently, it was in the news because President Obama's prospects at re-election remained well above the 50 percent rate in the run-up to the election. The website is currently accepting bids (from non-U.S. customers) on which movie will win the Academy Award for Best Picture (Argo is at 28 percent); whether the U.S. economy will go into recession in 2013 (25 percent chance); and whether the Dow Jones industrial average will close on or above 13,000 on Dec. 31 (50 percent chance)., (h/t NPR's Steve Mullis)
Shoppers line up in a Best Buy store in Rockville, Md., during a Black Friday sale. Thanksgiving weekend sales jumped nearly 13 percent from last year, the National Retail Federation says., Shoppers line up in a Best Buy store in Rockville, Md., during a Black Friday sale. Thanksgiving weekend sales jumped nearly 13 percent from last year, the National Retail Federation says., For merchants, the stars are lining up at least so far., Online shopping jumped more than 28 percent on Cyber Monday compared with a year ago, according to IBM Benchmark. And the National Retail Federation says Thanksgiving weekend spending shot up to $59.1 billion, nearly 13 percent more than last year's $52 billion., Fortunately for retailers, those good numbers may keep coming because the heavens have lined up in such a way that the 2012 calendar is a real plus, says Chris Christopher, an economist with IHS Global Insight, a forecasting firm. There are more shopping days than we've had in years, he notes., That's because Thanksgiving fell on the earliest date possible. Since most people don't begin holiday shopping until Black Friday, separating the Thanksgiving turkey from the Christmas goose by as many days as possible is a good thing for retailers., An Extra Weekend , But there are two other timing factors that may really help this year. One is that Christmas Eve lands on a Monday. Procrastinators and you know who you are will have both Saturday and Sunday, Dec. 22 and 23, to go to the mall. Retailers love it when they have a whole weekend to lure last-minute shoppers just as the Christmas Eve pressure is peaking., And online dawdlers also can shop on that final weekend and still get the gifts delivered before sunset on Monday. Yes, you may pay more for the service, but Express Mail, UPS, FedEx and others will be making delivery rounds on Monday, Dec. 24. This year is the best of times for people who like to wait until the last minute to shop, Christopher said., But there's yet another calendar event that offers a sort of Powerball bonus. It's the fiscal cliff. If retailers' timing luck holds, that political and economic threat will be eliminated just in time to spur a celebratory round of shopping on the weekend before Christmas., A Fiscal Cliff Surprise?, Here's how it may play out: Congress must fix the so-called fiscal cliff a complex cluster of federal spending cuts and tax-break expirations that all come together at year's end., Lawmakers are scrambling to put together a deal in this calendar year, and most economists and pundits think they will find some way to compromise. But for now the threat of inaction may be dampening many people's enthusiasm for shopping., For example, it's not yet clear how many automatic spending cuts will kick in next year. If Congress were to allow all of the currently scheduled reductions to take effect, many government contractors would lose their jobs next year. And many taxpayers know their tax bills may shoot up in January. None of that puts people in the mood to spend., Online shopping during Cyber Monday rose more than 28 percent from a year ago, according to IBM Benchmark., Online shopping during Cyber Monday rose more than 28 percent from a year ago, according to IBM Benchmark., The White House is certainly aware of the threat hanging over the economy. On Monday morning, it issued a report in which its economic advisers say that as we approach the holiday season, which accounts for close to one-fifth of industry sales, retailers can't afford the threat of tax increases on middle-class families., In a statement on the White House report, National Retail Federation CEO Matthew Shay agreed that congressional inaction would lead to stifled job creation, and dampened consumer confidence, which will ultimately lead to lower retail sales and potentially another recession., Optimists note that lawmakers are not just members of Congress. They also are human beings who would like to be home for the holidays., An Incentive For Lawmakers, So members of Congress have a great deal of incentive to wrap up any legislative package dealing with the fiscal cliff by Friday, Dec. 21. Christopher said he believes a compromise will be reached by that date., If he's right, the cloud of uncertainty would lift just in time to brighten Americans' economic mood as they go shopping on that final weekend before Christmas., Of course, the gamble could go the other way. If Congress remains hopelessly deadlocked as of Dec. 21, it could throw a big wet blanket over the economy and discourage shopping in those crucial days leading up to Christmas., For now, the retailers are crossing their fingers. It is encouraging to see the Administration's acknowledgement that retailers and their customers will be among the hardest hit if our elected officials fail to address ongoing economic uncertainty, says Shay, in the retail trade group's statement. The time for action is now., So, sure, the Mayan calendar may say the world is ending on Dec. 21, but the countdown calendar for the fiscal cliff and Christmas Eve is pointing to good times.
President Obama and daughters Sasha and Malia go shopping at a small bookstore, One More Page, in Arlington, Va. This is shaping up to be a better holiday season for independent booksellers than in past years., President Obama and daughters Sasha and Malia go shopping at a small bookstore, One More Page, in Arlington, Va. This is shaping up to be a better holiday season for independent booksellers than in past years., In recent years, the start of the holiday shopping season has meant nothing but gloom for independent bookstores. But this year, the mood seems to be lifting, and a lot of booksellers are feeling optimistic. Even President Obama kicked off his Christmas shopping at a neighborhood bookstore in Northern Virginia., Even so, booksellers are still having trouble enticing customers to plunk down cash for expensive hardcovers when e-books are so popular. Steve Bercu has been in the book business for 40 years. His store, BookPeople in Austin, Texas, has survived the threat of big chains, competition from Amazon and now the popularity of e-books. These days, Bercu says the brick-and-mortar bookstores that are still standing have a loyal following., People choose to come to this store to do their Christmas shopping on a regular basis. It's a place you can bring your family; it does not have the overwhelming intensity of a shopping mall; it's a single store, he says. And it's just part of the season here in Austin., The holidays, Bercu adds, are definitely the season for hardcovers. Any other time of year, you might settle for a paperback or prefer the convenience of an e-book. But at this time of year, customers are looking for something special for someone special that novel that won the National Book Award, or maybe the biography everyone is talking about, or one of those glossy coffee-table books filled with beautiful photos and artwork., Anything that anyone has ever thought of as a coffee-table book pretty much only works as a coffee-table book, Bercu says. I can't imagine anybody's gonna put ... any kind of e-readers on the coffee table and hope people look at it; it just doesn't look the same., Daniel Goldin of Boswell Book Company in Milwaukee agrees that e-books are no threat to the Christmas dominance of coffee-table books. But Goldin says art and photography volumes actually aren't doing that well at his store this year. This holiday season, Goldin says, cookbooks are the new black. And I don't mean cheap cookbooks, he says. No one wants to spend $60 on an art book but a $60 cookbook will fly off the shelves., We know people aren't particularly cooking out of those books, Goldin says, so it's the equivalent experience. It's people buy the book to have the book, to show off the book, to enjoy the book, to be enraptured by the book, but only maybe to make one of the recipes., Some hardcover books require a harder sell, Goldin continues. Customers have to be persuaded that a bound book has a value that can't be found in an e-book. I think the key is to convince them that this is one that's a keeper, he says. We're seeing some wonderful, physical books, especially in hardcover, that are just beautiful, and we'll make a case for that. We'll kind of have a customer weigh a book, put it in their hands, and say, 'Look at the quality of this paper ... that book won't be yellowed, and it won't be brittle. That book will look great in 10, 20 years.' , I think the smarter publishers are realizing that the way the physical book matters is in the design of it, says Jessica Stockton Bagnulo, one of the founders of Brooklyn's Greenlight Bookstore. She says Greenlight has started a First Editions Club for customers who want to build their own collection of books that will last., It works a little like a wine of the month, or a chocolate of the month club, she says. You sign up for a six-month or a 12-month subscription, and then the booksellers at Greenlight will select new titles fiction or nonfiction that they think are great and might be valuable in the long term, and subscribers get a first edition of that book signed by the author., But booksellers aren't taking any chances. They know lots of people have an e-reader on their Christmas lists, so hundreds of independent bookstores have signed up to sell Kobo e-readers and e-books this Christmas right along with all those beautiful hardcovers.
Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Mary Schapiro., Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Mary Schapiro., (We updated the top of this post at 11:50 a.m. and 12:15 p.m ET):, Moving quickly after the announcement that Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Mary Schapiro is leaving on Dec. 14, the White House just said that President Obama has designated SEC Commissioner Elisse Walter to be her replacement., In a statement, the president says:, I want to express my deep gratitude to Mary Schapiro for her steadfast leadership at the Securities and Exchange Commission. When Mary agreed to serve nearly four years ago, she was fully aware of the difficulties facing the SEC and our economy as a whole. But she accepted the challenge, and today, the SEC is stronger and our financial system is safer and better able to serve the American people thanks in large part to Mary's hard work., I am also pleased to designate Elisse Walter as SEC Chairman after Mary's departure. I'm confident that Elisse's years of experience will serve her well in her new position, and I'm grateful she has agreed to help lead the agency, According to The New York Times' DealBook blog, Ms. Walter's appointment does not require Congressional approval because the Senate previously confirmed her as a commissioner. Eventually, the White House is expected to nominate another agency chief, according to a person briefed on the matter., Walter, a Democrat, was first appointed to the commission by President George W. Bush., Our original post:, The Securities and Exchange Commission just confirmed that Chairman Mary Schapiro is stepping down on Dec. 14., That word follows a report earlier this morning from The New York Times, which broke the news., Her departure is not a surprise. Last week, The Wall Street Journal wrote that current and former SEC officials have predicted Schapiro would soon step down. The Journal also reported that the Treasury Department's under secretary for domestic finance, Mary John Miller, is under consideration to be the next SEC chairman., In the SEC statement, Schapiro says:, It has been an incredibly rewarding experience to work with so many dedicated SEC staff who strive every day to protect investors and ensure our markets operate with integrity. Over the past four years we have brought a record number of enforcement actions, engaged in one of the busiest rulemaking periods, and gained greater authority from Congress to better fulfill our mission., She became chairman in 2009.
The scene at the registers in a Braintree, Mass., Target store on Black Friday., The scene at the registers in a Braintree, Mass., Target store on Black Friday., After Grey Thursday, Black Friday, Small Business Saturday and No Clever Name For It Sunday, we're on to Cyber Monday and already looking ahead to Giving Tuesday., Which raises a question: What about Wednesday?, The Sunday of the first big shopping season of the holidays doesn't seem to have been given a special name by the news media or the retail industry. It sort of gets lumped into the Black Friday hooh-hah. Maybe there's also a smidgen of respect for Sunday., But what about the middle of this week, following all the fuss? At least one Twitter user (DJ Official) is suggesting Weeping Wednesday ... the day after you get the bill., Of course, it won't be a Weeping Wednesday for somebody if he or she (or they) win the record Powerball jackpot now set at around $425 million., We'd welcome other suggestions for Wednesday in the comments thread., As for the news about how the holiday shopping season is going and what it bodes for the economy:, &mdash; Early Sales Pay Off, For Now: Retailers See Strong Weekend, But Worry Spending Could Falter; Online Booms. (The Wall Street Journal), &mdash; Cyber Monday Sales Could Reach $1.5 Billion; Black Friday Spending Surpasses $1 Billion For First Time. (MarketWatch), &mdash; While holiday shopping appeared to be off to a good start, analysts cautioned against reading too much into one weekend's numbers. Retailers have to sustain the initial burst through the November-December holiday season, which can account for a third of annual sales and 40 to 50 percent of profits for the year. (Reuters)
The bodies of these World War II U.S. Marines and Western Front soldiers are made by Lego, while the helmets and weapons are made by BrickArms. The uniforms are designed and printed by BrickArms., The bodies of these World War II U.S. Marines and Western Front soldiers are made by Lego, while the helmets and weapons are made by BrickArms. The uniforms are designed and printed by BrickArms., Lots of good business ideas have emerged from kids' play. Seattle-area resident Will Chapman could thank his youngest son. At the age of 9, he wanted to know all he could about World War II and was using Lego toys to act out history. But his son was stymied he couldn't find all the pieces he wanted., Each year Lego turns out 19 billion plastic bricks, figures and gears for building things. But sometimes, it seems, even 19 billion isn't enough., Will Chapman founded BrickArms after finding that Lego didn't have World War II pieces that his son wanted., Will Chapman founded BrickArms after finding that Lego didn't have World War II pieces that his son wanted., So we said, 'Let's try to make them out of Lego bricks.' But you can't. You can't make the weapons and the helmets he was looking for with the parts Lego has, so I said, 'Let's try to make them ourselves,' Chapman says., I just assumed it was another one of his creative adventures, says Will's wife, Jennifer. I really had no idea it was going to become a business., But one thing led to another. Chapman would soon give up his day job as a software engineer and become an entrepreneur., As soon as you walk in the door of the company known as BrickArms, you know you're in the lair of a Lego addict. Just about everywhere you look in this modest industrial space occupied by just Chapman and his wife, you see blank Lego pieces such as heads and torsos in multiple colors., You see display cases filled with authentic Lego minifigures along with Chapman's own creations, like a World War II soldier wearing a bandolier with ammunition pouches, a canteen and suspenders., Pretty amazing, considering the figure is only about an inch and a half tall. But there's more., He's got a T-shirt and a little bit of his neck showing, and on his back he's got a medical kit, he's got a utility pouch, he's got a couple of wrinkles, showing how that shirt might look if it were made of material, he says., You won't find anything quite like this that's made by Lego. Christoph Bartneck, who's written extensively about Lego and compiled a catalog of its minifigures, says Lego makes weapons and fighters from the Wild West and the fantasy world, but anything from the great wars or modern warfare is something they do not do., He says it's a decision based on the company's philosophy about what is appropriate for Lego play., And war themes don't really blend in there very well. The secondary market, of course, satisfies this need, he says., This figure is wearing the BrickArms Ushanka (Russian hat), and holding the BrickArms TT-33 pistol and PPSh submachine gun. The uniform is a Lego design from the Indiana Jones Lego series., This figure is wearing the BrickArms Ushanka (Russian hat), and holding the BrickArms TT-33 pistol and PPSh submachine gun. The uniform is a Lego design from the Indiana Jones Lego series., Now, you might think Lego would try to sic its lawyers on companies like BrickArms but it doesn't. And while Lego doesn't publicly endorse them, it acknowledges they offer something some of its fans want. , Chapman is free to turn blank Lego pieces, which he buys in bulk online, into custom figures. For his weapons, which typically retail for about $1 a piece, he uses computer-aided design programs and then makes a prototype using what's essentially an enhanced hobby-grade machine., Chapman has taught himself a lot about design and the manufacturing process, but is quick to say that advanced technology and software allow him to do things he couldn't have done just a few years ago., I'm constantly amazed that one person can do all this, that I can create something that didn't exist, Chapman says. Who gets to play with lasers and CNC machines and injection molders and fancy printers? It's the most fun job I've ever had., Chapman says while he's not getting rich at BrickArms, he's doing just fine.
First, there was the post-Thanksgiving sales spectacle Black Friday and then the online version, Cyber Monday. Now, charitable groups want to start a new holiday tradition it's called Giving Tuesday and the first one is tomorrow., It may seem a little surprising that no one came up with the idea before of designating a specific day to help launch the holiday charitable giving season., I mean this is just brilliant, to just give everyone time to pause and think about what's most important at the holiday season, says Jyl Johnson Pattee, the founder of Mom It Forward. The online community of mothers is one of more than 1,400 groups participating in this year's Giving Tuesday. Local Mom It Forward groups will do volunteer projects to mark the event, and they plan to host a Twitter party that anyone can attend online., We'll have an hour conversation about charity, holiday giving, volunteerism and how you can really make a difference over the holiday season, she says., &ldquo; I mean this is just brilliant, to just give everyone time to pause and think about what's most important at the holiday season. , - Jyl Johnson Pattee, founder of Mom It Forward , That's the idea: to get people excited about giving in the same way they might get excited about buying a big-screen TV at a bargain price., Darius Mans, president of the Washington, D.C.-based nonprofit Africare, says his group plans to make a special push on Giving Tuesday to communicate online with donors and beneficiaries., It's an opportunity for us to highlight the work that we're doing on the ground, which is trying to break the cycle of poverty in rural Africa, especially, Mans says. It's also a chance to showcase how individuals can have a big impact with not too much money, he says., Other groups, including retailers such as JC Penney, are planning fundraisers and service projects., Giving Tuesday is the brainchild of the 92nd Street Y, a nonprofit cultural and community center in New York. The group has an anonymous donor who will match contributions up to a total of $50,000., Kathy Calvin runs the United Nations Foundation, a Giving Tuesday organizer. She says the goal is to get people to think about charitable giving in a different way., Not sitting alone at their kitchen table at the end of the year making those end-of-year contributions, but actually in a group experience where they're sharing that passion with others, she says., Organizers hope that passion will be contagious at a time when charitable giving has been relatively flat and as nonprofits struggle to find new donors., Our data and sort of trends show that the acquisition of new donors has been down by several percentage points over the past couple of years, says Steve MacLaughlin, who runs the Idea Lab at a company called Blackbaud, which advises nonprofits on fundraising. So if you're not having new people coming in and starting to give to organizations that becomes a challenge because you're relying on existing donors., According to a new Blackbaud survey, almost half of existing donors asked about contributions said they plan to give less or to fewer charities this holiday season. Only 13 percent said they plan to give more. MacLaughlin notes that the average age of the average donor these days is 65. That's one reason Giving Tuesday events will rely a lot on social media, such as Twitter and Facebook., Part of what the nonprofit sector is trying to understand how to do is to engage younger donors, he says, adding that those donors generally want to be more actively involved in the causes they support., For its part, Blackbaud will mark the day with a $10,000 donation to a foundation that encourages innovation in philanthropy. The company also will be analyzing the impact of Giving Tuesday to see if it actually works.
A flag urges customers to shop locally near a store in Boalsburg, Pa., on Friday. Owners of small stores hope to get a boost from Small Business Saturday., A flag urges customers to shop locally near a store in Boalsburg, Pa., on Friday. Owners of small stores hope to get a boost from Small Business Saturday., Jammed between Gray Thursday, Black Friday and Cyber Monday is yet another day devoted to shopping: Small Business Saturday., Wallets are expected to open yet again on Saturday this time for mom-and-pop stores. Main Street in Littleton, Colo., is filled with them. The street is lined with small bars and restaurants along with other businesses, including a spice store and a men's clothing boutique., Dave Drake owns Colorado Frame and Savvy Stuff, the savvy stuff being women's accessories, purses, scarves and decorations., Drake, who has owned the store for 34 years, says he and his fellow business owners give customers what they want and what they don't expect., It's unique, it's fun, it's local. We will carry products that they won't find anywhere else except in downtown Littleton, in the historic area, such as a poster of the old racetrack that used to be down here, he says. And across the street, she carries art and products that were made here locally. They won't find that anywhere else. So if they want to see it, they've got to come here., Drake says he's seen a difference during the holiday season since businesses along the strip in Littleton started participating in Small Business Saturday three years ago., The government estimates that last year 100 million people participated in Small Business Saturday., The idea grew out of a program from American Express. Some say it's a way for the company to court small business, which often don't take AmEx cards because of higher fees., The company continues to spend millions promoting the day, which has also drawn support from the White House. , Half the people who work in this country own or work for a small business, says Karen Mills, who heads the Small Business Administration. You know, two out of every three net new jobs come from small businesses., Those small businesses are vital to the country's economic recovery, according to Chris Christopher of IHS Global Insight., It's noticeable that the employment numbers, even though above water, haven't been the greatest, he says, and one of the reasons is small businesses not doing that well., Christopher says he doesn't expect small retailers to help with the job outlook anytime soon because they're being squeezed between the big chain stores on one side and the online companies on the other., Small businesses are just having a hard time competing, given the financial meltdown and the anemic growth in its aftermath, especially on consumer spending, and they can't compete on prices, and they can't compete in terms of outreach, advertising and other issues like that, he says. So they're really having a hard time of it., Christopher says, despite consumers best intentions to help small businesses, many are likely to forget them when they go shopping online on Cyber Monday.
People waited in line to make purchases at a Macy's department store in New York during last year's Black Friday shopping weekend., People waited in line to make purchases at a Macy's department store in New York during last year's Black Friday shopping weekend., Black Friday may not yet be a bigger holiday than Thanksgiving, but it certainly has a bigger marketing budget. Retailers may have needed it to overcome the term's long and negative history., And that's well before you get to talk of striking Walmart workers, or violence involving impatient shoppers in recent years., Older generations may still associate Black Friday with the stock market crash of 1929, which triggered the Great Depression. But the connotation of financial distress dates back even further, to the collapse of the U.S. gold market on Sept. 24, 1869., The term Black Friday survived to be used again and again for various disasters and unfortunate events, including a 1910 incident in England where police assaulted several hundred suffragettes at a protest, notes Richard Townley in The Washington Times., What does any of this have to do with shopping? Perhaps nothing. But even the earliest references to Black Friday as a post-Thanksgiving retail spree were negative., The term appears to have originated about 50 years ago among police in Philadelphia inconvenienced by downtown crowds kicking off the holiday shopping season. Those crowds added to congestion from traffic in town for the Army-Navy football game, which in that era was generally played in Philly the Saturday after Thanksgiving., Black Friday was not a happy term, department store historian Michael J. Lisicky told CBS News last year. The stores were just too crowded, the streets were crowded, the buses and the police were just on overcall and extra duty., Even a sales manager at the department store Gimbels in Philadelphia back in 1975 acknowledged the term's negative connotation and link to traffic headaches. That's why the bus drivers and cab drivers call today 'Black Friday,' she told The Associated Press, while watching a policeman struggle with a crowd of jaywalkers. They think in terms of the headaches it gives them., Prior to the mid-1980s, the term 'Black Friday' was always used for some calamitous event, columnist Paul Mulshine wrote in New Jersey's Star-Ledger. All of that negativity makes sense. 'Black Friday' has a naturally gloomy sound to it., Of course retailers have long since embraced it, holding that the black in Black Friday is borrowed from accounting, meaning they hope to get in the black for the year by dint of holiday sales., Some accounts credit this meaning to Peter Strawbridge, president of Strawbridge &amp; Clothier, a now-defunct retailer that was based in Philadelphia., But it doesn't seem that Strawbridge himself liked Black Friday much., It sounds like the end of the world, and we really like the day, he told The Philadelphia Inquirer back in 1984. If anything, we should call it 'Green Friday.'
1 of 9, If you like photographing, but are somehow not enticed by long lines, getting elbowed in the ribs and cut off by shopping carts in pursuit of a red tag sale, Picture Black Friday might give you another excuse to get out there today., I think there are enough people turning the economy over, says Sandy Carson. I'd rather just make photos and be an observer., This is the fourth year that Carson has participated in the crowd-sourced photojournalism project. Picture Black Friday, the website states, aims to revisit and analyze a combination of forces a worsening economy, financial desperation, excitement, fear and a distinctly American cultural tradition that culminate the morning after Thanksgiving., Whether you're shopping or shooting, good luck out there. I'll be eating leftovers.
Walmart associate Angel Campos stocks Christmas decorations Wednesday ahead of the pre-Black Friday event at the Wal-Mart Supercenter store in Rosemead, Calif., Walmart associate Angel Campos stocks Christmas decorations Wednesday ahead of the pre-Black Friday event at the Wal-Mart Supercenter store in Rosemead, Calif., Gray Thursday may become the new Black Friday. Many big retailers have moved up the beginning of their shopping season, traditionally the Friday after Thanksgiving, to Thursday evening., Brick-and-mortar retailers are feeling pressure from online retailers, which have given consumers an earlier shopping option., In the past, online retailers have had Thanksgiving Day all to themselves, says Marshal Cohen, retail analyst with the NPD Group. And what that means is by the time Black Friday comes around, a lot of consumers have already spent a bunch of money., But whether opening on Thanksgiving is worth the effort will depend on the customers' response., Buying Early, Online spending has increased fivefold in the past decade. Cohen says it's that online spending that brought about the Black Friday deals in the first place. He says as online shopping grows, traditional retailers are trying to build excitement and get the dollars as soon as they can., When the wallet is at its fullest, consumers are less likely to look for deeper discounts and more likely to spend on themselves, Cohen says. So that early dollar is the most coveted dollar., The battle for those dollars will begin even before the pie is served., There's been a backlash against the early hype. Virginia Edwards, from the suburbs of Denver, says she'll shop Friday but not Thursday., I'm spending it with my family. ... It's Thanksgiving, I have a whole bunch of people coming over, and I plan to do that on Thursday, she says., Edwards says she likes to go shopping after the holiday. Besides, she says, she's already gotten most of her shopping done and plenty of good deals., I buy a lot of my stuff online just because I don't have to pay tax, and they've had really good specials the last two weeks, she says. So I just have a few more gifts to get and I'm done I just shop for stocking stuffers., Store Responses, Julie Seewald will work at a department store with the crowds late Thursday., I'd rather not, if I could choose, but everyone who does that just kind of has to buckle down, she says, and it's part of retail., But not all retailers are getting into the game. Nordstrom has put up signs explaining that it won't be open on Thanksgiving., The signs say that we celebrate one holiday at a time, and that we are unveiling our holiday decorations the day after Thanksgiving in all of our stores nationwide, says Brooke White, vice president of communications at Nordstrom., She says customers appreciate that Nordstrom gives each holiday its time., Risky Business?, Meanwhile, Cohen, the retail analyst, says there is a great risk of consumers getting burned out on the holiday season. Cohen says Gray Thursday is a bit of a gamble., We all think that retailers have really thought this thing through, but they're trying this, he says. If the consumer doesn't respond, and retailers don't have a big, strong day and it isn't worth their time and energy ... then they won't do it next year., Cohen says consumers have rebelled against retailers before. But he says if the bargain hunters and those who want a getaway from their families unite, Gray Thursday could be with us for a while.
Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., prepares to announce a debt ceiling deal in July 2011. That deal laid the foundation for the across-the-board spending cuts set to take effect on New Year's Day, 2013., Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., prepares to announce a debt ceiling deal in July 2011. That deal laid the foundation for the across-the-board spending cuts set to take effect on New Year's Day, 2013., New Year's Day typically inspires hope and new beginnings. But this next one may be cause for trepidation. Tax cuts for all income levels expire on Jan. 1, 2013, and most federal programs will face a 10 percent haircut because Congress failed to agree on a deficit-reduction plan., It all goes back to some hot, frantic days in late July and early August of 2011. Treasury officials were warning that the nation was near defaulting on its debt for the first time. Congressional Republicans, spurred by Tea Party activists, set off this unprecedented crisis because they refused to raise the government's borrowing limit unless spending was cut by an equal amount. And they would not accept more revenue as a means to offset a hike in the debt ceiling., A Last-Ditch Scramble, More than $2 trillion in deficit reduction had to be found and fast. Congress hurriedly agreed to $1 trillion worth of cuts over the next decade, with the remainder to be found later by a congressional supercommittee proposed, at the time, by Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid., There would be a joint committee that would move forward, and there would be a trigger that if they didn't resolve this, then something else would happen, Reid said in late July. And based on past experiences, I think there would be tremendous incentive not to let that certain thing happen when the trigger kicked in., That certain thing Reid referred to is what's known as sequestration. Lawmakers agreed that if they failed to come up with a deficit-reduction plan, draconian across-the-board cuts in federal spending would be triggered Jan. 1, 2013 the same day that all the George W. Bush-era tax cuts were scheduled to expire., At the White House, President Obama gave his blessing. If we need to put in place some kind of enforcement mechanism to hold us all accountable for making these reforms, I'll support that too, if it's done in a smart and balanced way, he said., Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell was also on board. I think I can say with a high degree of confidence that there is now a framework to review that will ensure significant cuts in Washington spending, he said., Ross Baker, a congressional expert at Rutgers University, says that at the time, minds were not focused on what might be happening at the beginning of 2013., It was August. August is a time for recesses, not the time for serious legislation, he says. I think the real problem at the time was trying to ensure that there was not a default. They just had to get beyond that., A Deal That Pleased No One, Some Democrats, including Sen. Tom Udall of New Mexico, voted for the debt-ceiling deal only because it avoided default. Almost everything else about this deal stinks, and it stinks to high heaven, Udall said at the time., And some Republicans voted for the deal, even though it could end up shearing a trillion dollars off defense spending. This should never have been agreed to by members of Congress, but most of all, should never have been promoted by the president, said Arizona Sen. Jon Kyl., Ultimately, the supercommittee charged with finding additional deficit reduction last year failed to do so, after Republicans on the panel rejected raising any new revenue. So the trigger for automatic spending cuts was cocked., But in his final debate with then-presidential candidate Mitt Romney, Obama seemed to rule out sequestration. First of all, the sequester's not something that I proposed, he said. It's something that Congress has proposed; it will not happen., Baker thinks the president had reason to trust that Congress would prevent sequestration. With a gun at its head, Congress will, in fact, act, Baker says. But then, and only then., Indeed, after meeting with Obama last week, Sen. McConnell and House Speaker John Boehner said there could be a new way to cut deficits. Both said they are prepared to put revenue on the table., And if lawmakers do hit on a way to mix spending cuts and more revenue to cut deficits and avoid sequestration, New Year's could be cause for celebration.
The big name in the Hostess lineup., The big name in the Hostess lineup., Maybe the end is nigh, after all., A judge has approved Hostess' plan to liquidate the company, all but assuring that the maker of Twinkies, Ding Dongs, Donettes and Wonder Bread will cease to exist., The New York Times reports:, Judge [Robert] Drain's motion spells the almost certain end of Hostess, an 82-year-old bakery that survived the Great Depression, numerous wars and countless low-carb diets. But the company, whose stable of sugary confections also include Ho Hos and Ding Dongs, struggled for more than a decade with the public's increasing fondness for lower-calorie, less-processed snacks., During a hearing that stretched for more than four hours, company executives and advisers espoused a simple message: expedited sales of the company's brands will raise the maximum amount of money possible. And letting Hostess begin shutting its doors for good sooner would be kinder to employees., As we've told you last Friday, the company decided to call it quits saying they simply do not have the financial resources to survive an ongoing national strike., But, this week, a bankruptcy judge asked the company and its employees' union to give negotiations one more try. Those failed, so Judge Drain gave the go ahead for liquidation today., The AP says Hostess is now free to fire its 18,000 workers and take advantage of outside interest in its brands, which a banker said could fetch up to $2.4 billion.
The scene at a career fair last month in New York City., The scene at a career fair last month in New York City., There were 410,000 first-time claims for unemployment insurance last week, down 41,000 from the level of the week before when the number of applications soared because of the lingering effects of Superstorm Sandy., The Employment and Training Administration just released the latest figure. At 410,000, claims were still running at a pace above the pre-Sandy range of 350,000 to 400,000 a week., Bloomberg News starts its report on the news this way: Fewer Americans filed applications for unemployment benefits last week as damage to the labor market caused by superstorm Sandy began to subside. ... The level of claims reflects the economic drag associated with Sandy, which made landfall in the Northeast on Oct. 29, killing more than 100 in the U.S. and leaving about 8 million homes and businesses without power for days.
Hi! I'm back again. I'm a former banker, now a writer at Dealbreaker and an answerer of real and imagined questions about the financial world here. You can send questions to planetmoney@npr.org with ask a banker in the subject line, or ask on Twitter (@planetmoney). The last couple of times we've talked, we've discussed things that scare people about the stability of the financial world, like derivatives and high frequency trading. Today's question is another one of those. BE AFRAID! Next week we'll discuss puppy ownership among investment bankers or something. Anyway:, Q. Do you think that the banks are still too big to fail?, Of course! Come on, man! Next question., Q. What exactly does it mean to be too big to fail, anyway?, So: Banks are basically in the business of owing money to people.* All the money in your checking account is money the bank owes you. And banks' trading businesses are mostly conducted with borrowed money.**, Banks borrow all this money and invest it in things mortgage loans, Treasury bonds, derivatives, whatever. Sometimes those investments lose value. If they lose enough value, then either (1) some of the people who loaned money to the bank don't get their money back, or (2) somebody outside the bank comes up with money to give to the people who loaned money to the bank., In the U.S., banks where you can open an ordinary bank account are all insured through a federal program. Banks pay for this insurance. When a bank fails, whether it's big or small, people with ordinary bank accounts will get their money back., Really big banks have that insurance too, but they also have something else. Or, people think they do. People have an expectation that, if a really big bank blows up, the government will step in to repay lots of people who loaned the bank money not just people with ordinary bank accounts but bondholders and derivatives counterparties., This is not an insurance policy that everyone agrees on in advance and the bank pays for; it's just an implicit guarantee, a sense everyone has that this would happen, because it would be too much of a mess if it didn't. If you're a giant bank, too big to fail is like a random blessing: You blow up, and poof, you've got insurance that covers all this stuff you didn't buy insurance for., Too big to fail also means that the government will endeavor to keep you open for business: it won't just pay off your debts and sell you off for spare parts.*** The government isn't just interested in protecting your creditors from losing money; it's interested in keeping you around doing what you're doing, because you're doing something important. JPMorgan, for instance, is one of two banks that runs the plumbing of the triparty repo system; if JPMorgan went away, nobody would be triparty repo'ing any more, and you'll just have to trust me that That Would Be Bad. (But it would.), Q. So why would a bank want to be too big to fail?, Remember: banks are in the business of owing people money. Being too big to fail makes you better at owing people money: if you somehow lose all their money, the government will step in and give you money to give back to them., That's good for the people you owe money to. They sleep more soundly and lend you money more cheaply knowing (guessing!) that (1) you'll probably give them their money back and (2) if you don't, someone else probably will. Customers and counterparties and lenders and bondholders, if they're smart, want their bank to be too big to fail., This allows too-big-to-fail banks to pay lower interest rates on the money they borrow than other banks, which can make them more profitable. That lets them make more money for their shareholders who should also love too-big-to-fail banks and for themselves. Bigger bonuses for everyone!, Q. So too big to fail is good, then? Everybody seems to win?, Oh, sure. Everybody but the people who'll be bailing out the banks when things go wrong. I guess those people are called you, in some loose taxpayery way., Q. That sounds less nice. Just how much money am I giving these banks anyway?, No one really knows. The too big to fail subsidy lives entirely in a world of uncertainty. It's not even clear which banks are too big to fail. A lot of people were genuinely surprised that Lehman Brothers, for instance, was allowed to fail, and I guess some were surprised that AIG wasn't., There are some predictions about who is too big to fail and who isn't. Moody's, the credit rating agency, for instance, adjusts its credit ratings of the big banks to a level reflecting Moody's assumptions about a very high likelihood of support from the US government for bondholders or other creditors in the event such support was required to prevent a default. But those are just assumptions.****, There are various clever ways to try to estimate the size of the too-big-to-fail subsidy. The Cleveland Fed rounds up some research here, and guesstimates that the number is about $45 billion a year. So the average American is paying about $143 a year to subsidize JPMorgan and its hefty friends. Not counting overdraft fees., But that really is just a guess.*****, Q. So is anyone doing anything about too big to fail?, Of course. Here's a nice speech from the President of the New York Fed last week, laying out some of what the government has done to reduce the likelihood that banks will be too big to fail, and also the likelihood that they'll fail. (Quite different things!), One such effort is a thing called G-SIFI capital surcharges. This forces banks that are really big and interconnected (the ones you might guess are too big to fail) to raise additional capital. Capital is a slippery beast to wrestle with but you could say that more capital makes a bank (1) safer and (2) less profitable. This has two advantages: one, it makes too-big-to-fail banks safer, and two, it makes it less attractive to be a too-big-to-fail bank, since you pay for that status with extra capital., You can tell that this is a pretty good idea by the fact that the big banks are complaining about it. You can tell that it's not &lt;i&gt;that&lt;/i&gt; good an idea by the fact that no one's actually done anything to stop it: if those surcharges actually made it way less profitable to be a too-big-to-fail bank, some of those big banks would be getting smaller so as to be more profitable. The fact that that doesn't really happen****** suggests that too-big-to-fail is still pretty attractive., Q. Why not just break up the banks?, Sure. I mean, fine. Remember though that bigness makes banks better at their job of owing people money. That's an important job. If the banks got worse at it, some people would be sad. What would they do about it? Maybe just get by with people owing them money worse, like you do with Apple Maps., Or maybe they'd turn to shadow banking, which is a popular way of having money owed to you without going through banks. That's been on the rise in recent years, in part because banks are not as risk-free as (people thought) they used to be., Q. Oh. Should we worry about shadow banking?, Sure, probably. Puppies!, * Or being owed money by them but whatever. Banks are also in the business of being owed money by people but that is sort of less interesting. All businesses owe money and are owed money; the weird thing about banks is how much money they owe, not how much they're owed. Take JPMorgan; it has give or take $200bn of stockholders' equity on $2.3trn of assets, meaning that for every dollar JPMorgan has, it owes someone 91 cents., ** Pretty much the only banking business that isn't about owing people money is traditional investment banking - advising on mergers and underwriting securities deals. You can have good or bad or mixed feelings about this but for the most part it isn't exactly scary., *** Think of Hostess, the snack food company, which has been bankrupt but running its business for months, but which recently filed to liquidate and stop running its business. Twinkies are apparently not too big to fail., **** And they're hard to make in a vacuum. You could just about believe that if Bank of America, say, came up with some idiosyncratically moronic way to lose $100 billion, the government would let it fail. (JPMorgan maybe not so much.) But the realistic way for Bank of America to lose $100 billion would be the sort of economic disaster scenario where every bank is losing that kind of money. And &lt;b&gt;all the banks combined&lt;/b&gt; will always be too big to fail., ***** Similarly you can take a guess about how much the last round of bank bailouts cost taxpayers. That's just an accounting exercise - there's no uncertainty! they already happened! - and yet is bafflingly difficult., ****** One possible counterexample is Jefferies, a small investment bank that has studiously avoided going over the $50 billion asset threshold that puts you at risk of that G-SIFI designation, possibly to avoid the capital surcharge. This is not much of a counterexample, though, as no one was really going to think that Jefferies was too big to fail.
At Hewlett-Packard headquarters in Palo Alto, Calif., At Hewlett-Packard headquarters in Palo Alto, Calif., Saying it was a victim of serious accounting improprieties, disclosure failures and outright misrepresentations by a British software company it acquired last year, tech titan Hewlett-Packard just announced it erased $8.8 billion from its books last quarter to properly account for the acquisition., The accounting charge essentially wiped out the company's profits for the quarter, as The New York Times' DealBook blog writes. CNBC notes that Hewlett-Packard avoided calling what happened fraud., The company's stock is down nearly 10 percent in pre-market trading this morning., As DealBook adds, H.P. bought the firm, Autonomy, last summer to bolster the technology pioneer's presence in the enterprise software market., The Financial Times notes that:, The decision to pay $10 billion for Autonomy was criticized earlier this year after HP reported 'very disappointing' revenues for the enterprise search company in its April quarter. This resulted in [CEO Mike] Lynch leaving HP. HP announced an $8 billion writedown in August in its services division, made up largely of its $14 billion EDS acquisition of 2008., HP has contacted the Securities and Exchange Commission's enforcement division and the U.K.'s Serious Fraud Office, the FT says.
People crowd the aisles inside Macy's department store Nov. 25, 2011, in New York after the midnight opening to begin the Black Friday shopping weekend., People crowd the aisles inside Macy's department store Nov. 25, 2011, in New York after the midnight opening to begin the Black Friday shopping weekend., Have you ever been out shopping for other people during the holiday season, and the sales were so good you couldn't help but buy something for yourself?, The National Retail Federation calls that self-gifting, and says that this year consumers who do it plan to spend an average of about $140., Spokeswoman Kathy Grannis says that's the most in the 10 years the NRF has been asking shoppers about the trend., People really look forward to the holiday season and the discounts that are offered, because they know that they're going to get items significantly less than they may have any other time of the year. You know, when you see cashmere sweaters that were previously $150 now marked down to $30 and $40, that's a great example of what people would be driven towards, Grannis says., For Jackie Lerner, last year it was a cherry-red leather purse. Lerner is a psychologist who lives outside Boston, and she's an admitted self-gifter., I never really wanted a red purse, but my sister-in-law did, and we were out holiday shopping. Go into the Michael Kors outlet, signs up everywhere, 20, 30, 40 percent off, and there we walked out of the store with two Michael Kors red purses, Lerner says., But she never meant to put hers under the tree., Lerner remembers when most of the big sales were after the holidays. Now that promotions come much sooner, she admits it's easy to rationalize getting something for herself, even when she is supposed to be shopping for friends and family., You're giving to other people if you have the disposable income. And then if the sale banner is up there, you kind of feel like you deserve it, Lerner says., Retailers have caught on and a growing number actively market to people who feel that way., This year, Macy's is already advertising Cyber Monday deals on its website, encouraging shoppers to treat themselves to major savings on indulgences like makeup, slippers and jewelry., Other stores use short-term markdowns to sell bigger-ticket items they know consumers wait for the holiday season to buy, like flat-screen TVs., There's a scarcity effect, right? If something's going to be limited, you've gotta do it right away. It's going to urge you, push you to behave, to act, to consume, says Barbara Bickart, who teaches marketing and consumer behavior at Boston University., She says a lot of Black Friday promotions make shoppers think the good stuff will go fast., So these things like 'limited time offer,' you know, suggesting that something is scarce, you get caught up in the excitement of it, right? And they make you want to take action right away. So, yeah, they definitely know how to motivate consumers to act, Bickart says., The fact that people say they're planning to self-gift, Bickart adds, means some of them are doing it for practical reasons buying things they or their families really need., Regardless of motivation, the National Retail Federation says the term applies to 59 percent of this year's holiday shoppers and those are just the ones who admit it.
The big name in the Hostess lineup., The big name in the Hostess lineup., Twinkies Saved! Hostess, Bakers Union Agree to Mediation, Avoiding Shutdown., That's the alert this hour at CNBC.com., Reuters has issued this bulletin:, US BANKRUPTCY JUDGE SAYS PARTIES AGREE TO MEDIATION ON TUESDAY IN HOSTESS CASE., And according to The Associated Press:, Hostess Brands Inc. and its second largest union will go into mediation to try and resolve their differences, meaning the Irving, Texas-based company won't go out of business just yet. The news came Monday after Hostess moved to liquidate and sell off its assets in bankruptcy court citing a crippling strike last week., This follows Friday's big news, of course: No More Twinkies? Hostess Brands Is Shutting Down., We'll watch for more developments.
Peter G. Peterson speaks at the Fiscal Summit in Washington, D.C., last year. The event was sponsored by the Peter G. Peterson Foundation., Peter G. Peterson speaks at the Fiscal Summit in Washington, D.C., last year. The event was sponsored by the Peter G. Peterson Foundation., Debate over the long-term debt and the annual deficit has dominated the post-election agenda. Both the White House and Congress want to avert massive budget cuts and tax hikes early next year, a situation popularly called the fiscal cliff., The challenge has been brewing for years. But its current prominence owes much to the decades-long lobbying of billionaire Peter G. Peterson and his private foundation., For over a quarter of a century, I've been railing relentlessly, and boring others and sometimes even myself over our long-term, unsustainable debts, Peterson said in typically self-deprecating remarks at a conference held last week in Washington., While he was once U.S. commerce secretary, that was four decades ago under President Richard Nixon. Still, it was Peterson's money that helped create the Simpson-Bowles commission, which crafted one proposal combining tax hikes and spending cuts. And his is the money behind the Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget and its Fix the Debt campaign., As long as people are worshiping the great god of re-election ... then we're going to have a hard time getting to the Promised Land, said Erskine Bowles, appearing last spring on the Charlie Rose TV show., Peterson was also behind the task force headed by fiscal expert Alice Rivlin and former Sen. Pete Domenici, R-N.M., I believe leadership, including leadership from the president, is going to make this a war, a war on this debt. And if we do that, we might win, Domenici said two years ago on PBS NewsHour., After serving in the Nixon administration, Peterson moved into investment banking and private equity and did very well. When he retired, he was a billionaire, but one with a cause., Think tanks from the Employment Policies Institute on the left to the Heritage Foundation on the right were at the conference last week talking about their proposed solutions, which are funded by Peterson Foundation grants., Other groups Peterson has backed include The Concord Coalition, which he co-founded, and the grass-roots organizer AmericaSpeaks., All in all, the Peterson Foundation has given out nearly $26 million over the past three years, almost all of it aimed at attacking the debt., At the liberal Campaign for America's Future, Robert Borosage questions if that's the right strategy. Fix the debt, as opposed to fix the economy. Right? he says. And there's a big difference between the two when you're in the midst of a faltering recovery and you've still got over 20 million people in need of full-time work., Borosage says Peterson spread money around, so now the national debt is on everybody's agenda., If he can get liberal groups to argue about the debt, and conservative groups to argue about the debt, and they argue about it in different ways, I think he sees that as success, Borosage said., Borosage and other liberals argue that dwelling on the debt will mean drastic cuts in programs that help low- and middle-income Americans., This isn't at all what Peterson says he intends. In a video posted online by the foundation, he said this about safety-net programs such as Medicare, Medicaid and Society Security: I would hate to get, to permit ourselves to get into a position where these programs for the vulnerable were cut., As for the notion of sparing high-income job creators from higher taxes, he says: I would think that if the upper-class suffers far more than anyone else, both in terms of tax increases and benefit cuts, the middle-class would be far more willing to accept at least some sacrifice., But setting intentions aside, it's extremely rare that any one individual has so much impact on a big policy question., Peterson's son, Michael, the foundation's president, tells NPR that his father's role isn't really all that powerful., I think the main reason we are seeing a chorus of individuals calling for a solution on our fiscal challenges is because it's so obviously hurting our economy, he says., But others say Peter G. Peterson has largely driven the debate., I would call him the conductor of an orchestra of many people and events, that have put a focus on debt and the deficit since the mid-'80s, says James Thurber, a professor at American University where he oversees the Public Affairs and Advocacy Institute., It's an orchestra that few would have the stamina, or the financial wherewithal, to assemble or conduct.
This home sold last month in Miami., This home sold last month in Miami., Two positive economic indicators:, &mdash; Sales of existing homes increased in October, even with some regional impact from Hurricane Sandy, while home prices continued to rise due to lower levels of inventory supply, the National Association of Realtors reports., Its says homes sold at a 4.79 million annual rate last month, up from 4.69 million in September. Meanwhile, the national median existing-home price for all housing types was $178,600 in October, which is 11.1 percent above a year ago. This marks eight consecutive monthly year-over-year increases, which last occurred from October 2005 to May 2006., &mdash; Builder confidence in the market for newly built, single-family homes posted a solid, five-point gain to 46 on the National Association of Home Builders/Wells Fargo Housing Market Index (HMI) for November, released today. This marks the seventh consecutive monthly gain in the confidence gauge and brings it to its highest point since May of 2006., Bloomberg News looks at the reports (here and here) and concludes they're additional signs that the housing sector is on the mend. And a healthy housing sector is critical to the economy not just for the construction jobs it supports, but for the job growth it triggers in other sectors as new homeowners furnish and fix up their houses.
Wal-Mart, Target and Kmart all celebrate 50 years of business this year., Wal-Mart, Target and Kmart all celebrate 50 years of business this year., It's an anniversary that most Americans can celebrate the birthday of the big-box store. Discount shopping as we know it began 50 years ago. In 1962, enterprising retailers invented Wal-Mart, Target and Kmart., These stores changed the way we shop and the way we think about price. Historian Marc Levinson, author of The Great A&P; and the Struggle for Small Business in America, talked to NPR's Linda Wertheimer about what happened all those years ago, and how the stores will continue to evolve in the Internet age., This is among the first Target stores. The company now operates 1,782 stores across the United States., This is among the first Target stores. The company now operates 1,782 stores across the United States., On why 1962 was the year of the big-box store, In 1962, a number of different companies decided to try and create brand new store formats. The leader in that in 1962 is forgotten today. It was a company called Woolworths and it opened a store called Woolco. Woolco was expected to be the giant because Woolworths was gigantic. And everyone thought Woolco was going to conquer the world. Woolco, as your listeners will know, didn't make it., On how big-box stores popularized the idea of discounting after World War II, There were laws meant to prohibit big retailers from getting volume discounts, so they couldn't buy merchandise more cheaply than mom-and-pop stores and mark it down. The other thing was that the manufacturer could make a product, could tell the retailer, 'You may sell our good, but only at the price we set.' And so if a retailer wanted to sell a certain brand of camera or a certain phonograph record or whatever, it had to sell it at the set price. That started breaking down in the 1950s, and that really opened the way to discount retailing., While big-box electronics retailers like Best Buy are shutting stores and suffering income declines, America's big discounters are, largely, thriving. Still, retail experts say, chains such as Wal-Mart and Target are considering changes to their store models in order to better compete with online retailers., When it comes to big-ticket items like TVs and appliances, Amazon has the price and convenience advantage. But when it comes to consumables like groceries, Brian Yarbrough, an analyst at Edward Jones, says the physical stores still dominate., If you're going to buy some Tide and baby formula, is it worth it to save 50 cents on Amazon? he says., Probably not. And yet, the big-boxes still have work to do to make their stores more convenient for modern shoppers., The time it takes to drive to and walk through [a megastore] is more of a luxury for people than it used to be, says Bryan Gildenberg, an analyst with the research firm Kantar Retail., While Wal-Mart and Target are still opening large stores, they are putting new emphasis on smaller ones not just to save consumers time, but also to capture markets outside of the suburbs. Wal-Mart has opened Express stores in both urban and rural locations. Target, meanwhile, has introduced City Target stores in urban areas., They're also working on their Web business and experimenting with pickup services, like Wal-Mart's Click and Collect., These efforts make Gildenberg confident in the prospects of big-box stores at least for now., Wal-Mart and Target in particular are going to continue to grow over the next five years. They'll grow more slowly than in the previous, but they'll continue to grow, he says., &mdash; Jordan G. Teicher, On how big-box stores cornered the suburban market , One of the prerequisites for the big-box was the car. Everybody had to have a car because the big-box was sitting out in a parking lot somewhere. The big-box made shopping into a family experience. Mom and dad and the kids all piled into the car, they went out to this big store, and they could spend several hours there because there was, by the standards of the day, an enormous amount of merchandise. Now, you've got to give people a little sense of scale. We're talking about stores that were gigantic for their time, and that meant they might have about 50,000 square feet of space. If you go into a typical Wal-Mart Supercenter today, it's perhaps four times that size. So 'big' is relative, but for its day, 1962, these stores were quite large., On how the big boxes evolved from traditional variety stores, Stores had to figure out how to distinguish themselves. You couldn't all have the same merchandise and be just like the other one. And we went through a period of experimentation. ... Some [companies are] no longer with us. Some of them tried strategies and they just didn't work out. It was not clear in 1962 that running a discount store like this was going to be a winning strategy., On whether big-box stores will still be around in 50 years , There are very few retailers that have that kind of lifespan. There aren't too many that have been around for a hundred [years]. But even if they still exist, they may be quite different. For example, you see now retailers trying very much to integrate their physical store with their Internet store. So maybe the physical store becomes mostly a showroom you don't actually go there to buy things and walk out with them. You go there to look at things, and then you order them online and then they're delivered to your house. Or maybe you order them online and you go to the store to pick them up, but the store may not be filled with quite so much merchandise. There are quite a few possibilities, and I think it's really foolhardy to guess what this is going to look like frankly in 10 years, much less 50.
President Obama, accompanied by House Speaker John Boehner of Ohio, speaks to reporters at the White House on Friday during a meeting to discuss the fiscal cliff., President Obama, accompanied by House Speaker John Boehner of Ohio, speaks to reporters at the White House on Friday during a meeting to discuss the fiscal cliff., The White House and Congress continue to work on a deal that avoids the fiscal cliff and cuts deficits in the long run. One of the biggest hurdles is President Obama's proposal to raise tax rates for the wealthy., Republicans think a better course would be to raise revenue by closing loopholes and limiting deductions for high-income people. The question is, could that method raise enough money., The argument over how to get additional revenue to close the budget gap was carried on in dueling post-election news conferences last week., There are a lot of special-interest loopholes in the tax code, both corporate and personal, said House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio. There are all kinds of deductions, some of which make sense, others don't., Boehner said limiting or ending those unproductive tax breaks could boost growth and raise revenue., But Obama expressed skepticism during his news conference Wednesday. He said the Republican approach wouldn't raise enough money., It's very difficult to see how you make up that trillion dollars if we're serious about deficit reduction just by closing loopholes and deductions, the president said. You know, the math tends not to work., And the total that needs to be made up isn't just $1 trillion. That's because the president's proposal already calls for reducing mortgage interest and charitable deductions for the wealthy. Those steps are worth another $600 billion. So the total pile of revenue the Republican plan would have to produce to match the president's proposal is about $1.6 trillion., That's a tall order. One approach that was suggested by Mitt Romney during the campaign, and endorsed by the Wall Street Journal's editorial page last week, is to cap tax deductions at a specific dollar level. The nonpartisan Tax Policy Center has analyzed the idea. Its co-director, Donald Marron, says capping deductions for all taxpayers at $17,000 could produce $1.7 trillion in revenue over 10 years. That would meet the president's dollar goal. But there's one problem, Marron says., That would get to the president's revenue target, but obviously it would violate his desire not to raise taxes on people below the top 2 percent, he says., Of course, Marron says, Republicans don't agree with the president that $1.6 trillion in added tax revenue over the next 10 years is the right goal., There's also been discussion of aiming for $1 trillion rather than $1.6 trillion, and obviously $1 trillion would be easier to get to by doing things purely through deductions and exclusions and other tax breaks, Marron says., If you push that cap on deductions higher, let's say, up to $25,000, you could meet that $1 trillion revenue target. But you still don't eliminate the political problem, because around a quarter of the added tax burden would still fall on the middle-class taxpayers the president has pledged to protect., Marron does believe that eliminating many of the deductions and loopholes in the tax code is a good idea and could make the economy more efficient. But he says it needs to be done thoughtfully and deliberately., You know, if we had a rational, careful process, we would go through all of them one by one and decide whether to keep them, to fix them or to get rid of them, Marron says., He says dealing with the mortgage deduction provides a good example of the care that needs to be taken., There are many good arguments for why the mortgage interest deduction is bad policy and ought to be changed or eliminated. But you wouldn't want to do that tomorrow. That would be unfair to the people who've just bought a home on the expectation that they would have it. The housing market is weak., And ending the deduction could send the housing market back into the tank. Marron says it's the same with many of the other deductions that don't make sense. If they're going to be eliminated, Congress needs to figure out a way to phase them out slowly to give people time to adjust.
HUD Secretary Shaun Donovan in May of 2012., HUD Secretary Shaun Donovan in May of 2012., The Federal Housing Administration is on track to run out of money next September and may need a taxpayer bailout, an audit released today found., Responding to the audit, however, the Obama administration announced a series of measures that they hope will raise enough revenue to keep the agency from seeking government help., The Wall Street Journal explains:, Housing officials said Friday they would be raising annual insurance premiums charged on FHA loans by 0.1 percentage point in the coming weeks. The FHA will also eliminate a policy that allowed borrowers' insurance policies to lapse after five years and after their homes had at least 22% equity., The agency will also accelerate a previously announced program to sell up to 10,000 distressed mortgages every quarter. And it will ask Congress for greater authority to revamp its reverse mortgage program, which contributed to the agency's projected shortfall by $2.8 billion., Unlike previous years, officials said they couldn't rule out the possibility that the agency might need to seek a Treasury infusion in the coming year. But the proposed steps announced on Friday will 'reduce the need that FHA would need to tap into Treasury assistance' next year, said Shaun Donovan, secretary of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, which oversees the FHA, in a briefing with reporters on Friday., The Hill reports that the FHA is facing a $16.3 billion total shortfall, which was caused by the strong hit it took from the bursting of the housing bubble., The big question that comes out of all this is what role the U.S. government should play in backstopping the housing industry., The Hill reports:, House Financial Services Chairman Spencer Bachus (R-Ala.) warned on Thursday that 'because of the number of foreclosures, they've indicated they will have to come to the American people and ask for money.', Sen. Bob Corker (R-Tenn.), a member of the Senate Banking Committee, said that the 'FHA has strayed a long way from its original mission.', 'The recognition that FHA's economic value is now negative is a stark reminder that we have put off fundamental housing finance reform for too long.'
The federal government has all these ways of paying people to buy houses without actually, you know, paying people to buy houses., We've talked a lot about two examples of this:, 1. The mortgage-interest tax deduction is effectively a government payment to people who are paying a mortgage., 2. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac allow home buyers to get below-market-rate mortgages. They blew up in the housing bust, requiring a massive federal bailout., We haven't talked so much about a third example of a federal housing subsidy that doesn't seem like a subsidy: the Federal Housing Administration, aka FHA., Like Fannie and Freddie before the housing crisis, FHA has always funded itself. And, like Fannie and Freddie after the crisis, FHA may soon need a taxpayer bailout. An audit of FHA released today found that the agency is $16 billion in the hole., The FHA doesn't actually make loans. It guarantees them. If you get an FHA-backed mortgage and don't pay it back, the FHA has to make up the difference. The FHA requires everyone who gets an FHA loan to buy insurance, which is supposed to cover losses when borrowers default., But the system only works if the FHA prices the insurance correctly. And it appears that, during the early part of the housing bust, the FHA did not collect enough in premiums to pay off losses it will incur in the coming years., The trouble is likely to come from loans made in 2008 and 2009. At that time, it became increasingly difficult to get a private loan. So more and more borrowers turned to FHA-backed loans, and the agency wound up backing hundreds of billions of dollars in mortgages., On top of that, FHA loans require only a tiny down payment as little as 3.5 percent. As a result, when housing prices decline, borrowers very quickly end up owing more than their home is worth. This dramatically raises the risk of default., The agency has been raising the premiums it charges, among other steps, to try to fix the problem. But today's audit suggests that those steps haven't plugged the hole. FHA will probably need taxpayer money to make good on the promises it made as the housing market was collapsing., Source: Inside Mortgage Finance, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo, Update: FHA today announced several new steps it's taking to try to plug the hole in its finances. Details here.
News outlets in German and Sweden have been reporting for the past year that some of the products made in past decades for Swedish furniture giant IKEA were produced by political prisoners in Cold War-era East Germany., Today, IKEA conceded that the reports are true and that some of its representatives were aware of what was happening., We are deeply sorry that this could happen, Jeanette Skjelmose, head of sustainability at IKEA of Sweden, told the Aftonbladet newspaper, according to English-language The Local., After the news reports, IKEA asked auditors Ernst &amp; Young to investigate., Today, the company said that:, The investigation indicates that political and criminal prisoners were involved in parts of the component or furniture production units that supplied to IKEA 25-30 years ago. The investigation also shows that there were IKEA Group representatives who at the time were aware of the possible use of political prisoners in the former GDR production. Even though the IKEA Group took steps to secure that prisoners were not used in production, it is now clear that these measures were not effective enough., IKEA adds that it has, in consultation with the organisation Union of the association of the victims of communist despotism, ('UOKG' in Germany), decided to make a financial contribution to their scientific research project on forced labour in the former GDR., Aftonbladet reports the prisoners were paid about 40 East German marks a month for their work and that at the time a normal monthly salary in East Germany was around 1,000 East German marks. Today many of the prisoners think IKEA should compensate them for the work, the newspaper adds., An earlier post about IKEA: Women Erased From IKEA's Saudi Catalog; Company Apologizes.
Stock up now., Stock up now., Carrying through on its warning about what could happen, the management of Hostess Brands announced this morning that the company is going out of business and laying off its 18,500 employees., At issue: According to Hostess CEO Gregory Rayburn, we simply do not have the financial resources to survive an ongoing national strike., So, Twinkie fans, now might be the time to stock up. The same goes for those of you who love Ding Dongs, Donettes and Devil Dogs. And we can't neglect to mention Sno Balls and Wonder Bread. (Click here to see those and more of company's baked goods.), Hostess filed for bankruptcy protection back in January, saying its sales had been hurt by consumers' appetite for healthier foods. There is, of course, a Save Twinkies Facebook page. And save Twinkies seems to be a rising topic on Twitter., Will a white knight with a sweet tooth come through to bring Twinkies back?, Meanwhile, the company's demise comes at a complicated time for some Americans, what with marijuana laws being relaxed in several states., Update at 9:45 a.m. ET. What Went Wrong? What Can You Do With Twinkies?, For a long look at how Hostess got into this mess, there's this piece by Fortune. Here's an excerpt:, In truth there are no black hats or white knights in this tale. It's about shades of gray, where obstinacy, miscalculation, and lousy luck connived to create corporate catastrophe. Almost none of the parties involved would speak on the record. Still, it's clear from court documents and background interviews with a range of sources that practically nobody involved can shoot straight: The Teamsters remain stuck in a time warp, unwilling to sufficiently adapt in a competitive marketplace. The PE firm failed to turn Hostess around after taking it over. The hedgies can't see beyond their internal rates of return. Et cetera, et cetera, et cetera., The critical issue in the bankruptcy is legacy pensions. Hostess has roughly $2 billion in unfunded pension liabilities to its various unions' workers the Teamsters but also the Bakery, Confectionery, Tobacco Workers and Grain Millers International Union (which has largely chosen not to contest what Hostess wants to do that is, to get out of much of that obligation)., And for something completely different, check this post on The Salt: Wear 'Em, Chuck 'Em, Float 'Em: 10 Things To Do With Twinkies.
Voters in Washington and Colorado just approved measures legalizing marijuana for recreational use. But businesses that want to sell marijuana in those states will face a problem: No bank wants to do business with them., I called several banks in Washington. I called a local credit union, a tiny bank in the San Juan islands. Everybody said basically the same thing. Even if selling marijuana is legal under state law, it's still illegal under federal law. And banks and credit unions worry that this could get them in trouble., So people who want to go into the marijuana business who want to legally grow, distribute, sell marijuana in the state are going to have to operate, basically, like drug dealers. They're going to have to run a cash business., John Davis has been through the problem that future marijuana businesses are going to have. He sells medical marijuana in Seattle (medical marijuana has been legal Washington). And he had a really hard time finding a bank willing to work with him, so for a while he did business in cash., Payroll was a mess. It's impossible to order supplies baggies, lights, display cases without a credit card. PayPal works for some things, but not for others., How do you pay your taxes? Davis says. You can't go into the Department of Revenue and give them a wad of cash., Davis learned a bunch of tricks for operating an all cash business, and even teaches a course called canibusiness., In the end, Davis found a work-around that may be he best option for other people who want to get into the industry: Be vague with the bank. Don't tell them exactly what line of work you're in., Davis says he doesn't feel great about toying with the truth. But, he says, he has a legitimate business, and he needs a bank.
The line was long last week at a job fair in Chicago., The line was long last week at a job fair in Chicago., There were 439,000 first-time claims for unemployment insurance last week, up by 78,000 from the week before, the Employment and Training Administration says. Behind the big increase: Superstorm Sandy, which threw some people in the Mid-Atlantic onto the unemployment rolls and shut down state unemployment offices the week before meaning that some claims were postponed into last week., In other economic news, the Bureau of Labor Statistics says that consumer prices barely rose last month. The bureau's consumer price index ticked up just 0.1 percent from September. A 0.6 percent drop in gasoline prices was a large factor. In the past 12 months, prices have risen 2.2 percent.
The Deepwater Horizon oil rig burned on April 21, 2010., Update at 11:30 a.m. ET: Oil giant BP has agreed to plead guilty to criminal misconduct related to the 2010 Gulf Oil spill and will pay a record $4 billion in criminal penalties, the company just confirmed. And it will pay $525 million in civil penalties in a resolution with the Securities and Exchanges Commission. BP will make the payments over six years., About $2.4 billion of the criminal fine, BP says, will be paid to the National Fish &amp; Wildlife Foundation (NFWF) over a period of five years. In addition, $350 million will be paid to the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) over a period of five years., The company also says that:, As part of the resolution, BP has agreed to plead guilty to 11 felony counts of Misconduct or Neglect of Ships Officers relating to the loss of 11 lives; one misdemeanor count under the Clean Water Act; one misdemeanor count under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act; and one felony count of obstruction of Congress. This resolution is subject to U.S. federal court approval., Our original post: BP Expected To Plead Guilty, Pay Record Fine In Gulf Oil Spill Criminal Case., Oil giant BP is preparing to plead guilty to criminal misconduct related to the 2010 Gulf Oil spill later today, according to two sources familiar with the case. The sources said the settlement deal will also include the largest-ever penalty in a criminal case, topping the more than $1 billion payment by pharmaceutical maker Pfizer in a drug marketing prosecution (Pfizer also paid about $1 billion in civil penalties)., London-based BP confirmed it is in advanced discussions with the U.S. Justice Department and Securities and Exchange Commission to put an end to the long-running criminal investigation. The agreement will not cover civil environmental damages under the Clean Water Act, BP said., Eleven people died in an explosion on the Deepwater Horizon mobile rig in April 2010, touching off one of the largest environmental disasters in history. The damage to fish, birds, and water in the Gulf and along the borders of four states is still being studied by scientists., The two sources close to the case said a formal announcement is likely later today in New Orleans. One said that individual executives could face prosecution as well. To date, only one person, former BP engineer Kurt Mix, has been charged with a crime. Mix is fighting allegations he obstructed justice by deleting messages that reflected how much oil was gushing out of the Macondo well after the disaster., There's more on Morning Edition.
1 of 8, Prices change; that's fundamental to how economies work., And yet: In 1886, a bottle of Coke cost a nickel. It was also a nickel in 1900, 1915 and 1930. In fact, 70 years after the first Coke was sold, you could still buy a bottle for a nickel., Three wars, the Great Depression, hundreds of competitors none of it made any difference for the price of Coke. Why not?, In 1899, two lawyers paid a visit to the president of Coca-Cola. At the time, Coke was sold at soda fountains. But the lawyers were interested in this new idea: selling drinks in bottles. The lawyers wanted to buy the bottling rights for Coca-Cola., The president of Coca-Cola didn't think much of the whole bottle thing. So he made a deal with the lawyers: He'd let them sell Coke in bottles, and he'd sell them the syrup to do it. According to the terms of the deal, the lawyers would be able to buy the syrup at a fixed price. Forever., Andrew Young, an economist at West Virginia University, says the president of Coke may have signed the contract just to get the guys out of his office., Anytime you've got two lawyers in your office, you probably want them to leave, Young says. And he's saying, 'I'll sign this piece of paper if you'll just please leave my office.' , Bottled drinks, of course, took off. And Coca-Cola was in a bind. If the bottlers or a corner store decided to raise the price of a bottle of Coke, Coca-Cola wouldn't get any extra money., So, if you're Coca-Cola, you want to somehow keep the price down at 5 cents so you can sell as much syrup as possible to the bottlers. What do you do?, One thing you do is blanket the entire nation with Coca-Cola advertising that basically has '5 cents' prominently featured, Young says., The company couldn't actually put price tags on the bottles of Coke saying 5 cents. But it could paint a giant ad on the side of a building right next to the store that says, Drink Coca-Cola, 5 Cents., Since everybody was brainwashed people saw these ads all over it was hard for anyone to increase the price, says Daniel Levy, a professor of Economics at Bar-Ilan University in Israel and at Emory University in Atlanta., That contract with the bottlers eventually got renegotiated. But the price of Coke stayed at a nickel. That was partly due to another obstacle: the vending machine., The Coca-Cola vending machines were built to take a single coin: a nickel., Levy says the folks at Coca-Cola thought about converting the vending machines to take a dime. But doubling the price was too much. They wanted something in between., So they asked the U.S. Treasury to issue a 7.5-cent coin. At one point, the head of Coca-Cola asked President Eisenhower for help. (They were hunting buddies.) No luck., In the end, inflation killed the nickel Coke. The price of the ingredients rose. In the late 1940s, some stores sold Cokes for 6 cents. The last nickel Coke seems to have been in 1959., The nickel price had lasted over 70 years. And in retrospect, Andrew Young says, it wasn't a bad thing for the company. It's one reason Coke is everywhere today. The company couldn't raise the price. So it did the only thing it could: It sold as many Cokes as possible.
Millions of U.S. families have a recent foreclosure on their record. Typically, that means waiting at least seven years before securing another home loan. But some families say they are having luck buying again sometimes in as few as three years., Millions of U.S. families have a recent foreclosure on their record. Typically, that means waiting at least seven years before securing another home loan. But some families say they are having luck buying again sometimes in as few as three years., Buyers are coming back into the housing market after losing their homes during the financial crisis returning to homeownership more quickly than lenders have typically allowed., With millions of families with recent foreclosures on their records, some report that they are having luck buying a house in some cases within three years., Jason Strotheide, for example, bought his house in Charlotte, Mich., from his grandfather. After Strotheide refinanced the house to pay for renovations, payments increased, causing the family to rely more on ballooning credit. In early 2010, he and his wife filed for bankruptcy protection and lost their home to foreclosure., When we first walked away from the mortgage, I actually said that we'd never buy again, Strotheide says., With his debts wiped clean, Strotheide now rents, relies almost exclusively on cash and pays everything on the first of the month which has boosted his credit score back up to nearly 700. He says he'd like to live more off the grid, eating his own farm produce and raising livestock. So in the spring exactly three years after his foreclosure Strotheide plans to buy another property., We're looking for a place where we can get, maybe, five acres of land, a couple of outbuildings, a modest house and just enough space to grow the produce that we need for our family, Strotheide says., &ldquo; We had to take what we could get. And if they said 15 [percent], dog it, we'll take 15., - Steve Riggs, on the high-interest loan he's used to buy a new home, A Gray Area In Lending, Most lenders say the minimum waiting period to buy a home after a foreclosure is seven years, and private lenders say they haven't changed their rules., But under certain extenuating circumstances, Fannie Mae and the Federal Housing Administration will underwrite loans as early as three years after a foreclosure. And credit unions, which originate more loans these days, say they are often willing to work with individual borrowers., All this means buyers like Strotheide are navigating an apparent gray area in lending. It's unclear how many people there are like him. Banks, mortgage lenders and the National Association of Realtors say they don't track the number of people who've come back after a recent foreclosure., But Amber Hom, a real estate agent in Danville, Calif., says she's helped three families with recent foreclosures buy new homes this year about a 10th of her customer base., So many people ... have been in foreclosure in the United States, Hom says. There had to be a way for them to come back and do it again. I mean, there's just too many people., 'The Land Of Second Chances', Hom even helped a family that went through bankruptcy and lost not one but four homes through foreclosure just three years ago., I didn't think they were going to buy again for at least five to seven years, she says. I didn't think they were going to be able to do it at all. Fortunately we found a lender who was willing to work with them, and they were able to purchase again., Hom says she isn't surprised that people whose homes have been foreclosed on are finding ways to jump back into the market, just for the simple fact that this is the land of second chances., But precisely how that second chance comes about can vary widely, depending on specific circumstances. Some homeowners find it difficult to get jobs with a foreclosure on their record, which, in turn, makes it harder to recover from financial hardship., Others say banks won't lend to them, even years later, so they turn to private financing arrangements. In those cases, buyers can pay as much as four times the going rate for a conventional mortgage., Steve Riggs lost his home to foreclosure. Seven years later, without a green light from a bank, he asked his rental landlord in Desoto, Texas, to finance him instead., The landlord agreed at a whopping 12.9 percent interest rate., We had to take what we could get, Riggs says. And if they said 15 [percent], dog it, we'll take 15., Finding A Deal Amid The Foreclosures, But some others have found that time heals all their housing-related wounds. Laurie Levine bought her house in Orlando, Fla., in 2009 nine years after signing over her house in a deed in lieu of foreclosure., It'd been more than seven years, Levine says. [The foreclosure] didn't even come up., Levine says she no longer has any trouble getting loans or rentals, even though lending standards are stricter. At over 800, her credit score is now nearly perfect., Levine changed her financial habits, so she says she's in no danger of foreclosure. She also says it was easier to recover from it than she thought. In fact, there is a strange symmetry to the financial crisis., I've benefited from other peoples' foreclosures, Levine says. If it weren't for the housing bubble leaving so many other foreclosures in its wake, she says, she would never have been able to afford to buy again.
Tony Landenwish loads ammunition with cremated remains for Holy Smoke in Stockton, Ala. The bullets are used as an alternative to scattering a loved one's remains in a special place or putting them in an urn on the mantel., Tony Landenwish loads ammunition with cremated remains for Holy Smoke in Stockton, Ala. The bullets are used as an alternative to scattering a loved one's remains in a special place or putting them in an urn on the mantel., Many people keep cremated remains in an urn on the mantle or scatter their loved one's ashes over a sacred place., Now, a company has pioneered a new twist: putting cremated remains into ammunition., Thad Holmes and Clem Parnell, who founded Holy Smoke last year, say business is picking up, and they've received orders from as far away as South America and Europe., Thad Holmes and Clem Parnell, who founded Holy Smoke last year, say business is picking up, and they've received orders from as far away as South America and Europe., For $850, Holy Smoke will take cremated remains and put them into various types of shotgun shells and bullets for rifle and pistol shooters. The Stockton, Ala., company was started a year ago by two state game wardens., Literally and figuratively, Holy Smoke's business is booming. Clem Parnell, a co-founder, thought the families of the dead should have a livelier method to honor those who enjoyed the outdoors., Wouldn't it be cool to put some ash in a shell, to the point of a 250-round case of shells, and all his friends could go out and have a day on the range and celebrate the way this guy used to be? Parnell says. The way he was when he was alive vibrant and enjoying life., For Priscilla Isler, it was perfect. Her husband, Glenn, was a hunter at heart and he started young. His dad died when he was 10, leaving him and his mom, and nine brothers and sisters. Glenn took to the fields and forests to hunt for food., They're scrambling to make a living and sustain and feed the family, Priscilla says. Glenn would go off into the woods and he'd come back with two rabbits and [his mother would] say, 'Praise the lord, we're having meat tonight.' So it was truly in his blood., To Casket Or Not To Casket?, An Abbey's Run-In With Law On Who Can Sell Caskets, Cremation, Burial Or Body Farm?, Over the years, Glenn Isler tried to pass that on. He took a lot of young people on their first hunts and hoped one day to open a school to teach underprivileged kids a love for the woods and how to hunt safely., But he did not live long enough, so his wife decided to honor his life by having Holy Smoke put his ashes into ammunition., At the company's headquarters, Tony Landonwich sits at a loading table. Wearing protective eyewear, he loads a set of the special rounds., We use a hollow-point bullet, Landonwich says. The ashes are added and then it's loaded like any other bullet or shell., Getting started wasn't easy. There were many hurdles, such as obtaining county and state licenses and permits from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives., But business is picking up. The company's other co-founder, Thad Holmes, says Holy Smoke averages about one new order a week from coast to coast., By no means are we taking the place of a funeral or cremation, Holmes says. Everything we offer is for after the funeral and after the mourning has been done., For Priscilla Isler, firing bullets with her husband's ashes tucked inside is not about mourning but celebration. She even used a few round rounds to kill a wild pig that her family ate for their Fourth of July cookout., As she fires off a round containing Glenn's ashes near the fountain in her backyard, she says she loves being able to see the ashes as they fall back to earth., It's beautiful that you can see it dispersing and falling, that is just fabulous, she says., Isler says she can't imagine any other way to honor her husband's life than firing a bullet so he goes out with a bang.
Customers line up at an H&R; Block office in Nashville, Tenn., on April 17, the deadline for filing 2011 federal income taxes., Customers line up at an H&R; Block office in Nashville, Tenn., on April 17, the deadline for filing 2011 federal income taxes., Seriously, again?, Anyone who follows the adventures of the alternative minimum tax has to be getting sick of the many sequels. Again and again, this unpopular income tax threatens to hit middle-class families with large and unexpected tax increases., And each time the threat reappears, Congress applies a patch to fix the problem temporarily. That makes the threat an annual event along with the associated congressional hand-wringing and taxpayer confusion., So here we are again, with the AMT looming over about 27 million more taxpayers this year. It's just one part of the so-called fiscal cliff a big cluster of automatic spending cuts and tax hikes that will take effect at year's end unless Congress acts., November 13, 2012, To understand the AMT, you need three chunks of information, involving its history, its impact and the politics. Let's get started., AMT History, In 1969, Congress enacted an individual AMT to ensure that everyone paid a minimum amount of taxes, even while preserving tax breaks written into the code as economic and social incentives., Here's an example: Congress wanted to keep the home mortgage interest deduction to provide more incentive to buy real estate, on the grounds that homeownership has economic and social value. But the tax code had so many different deductions that some wealthy people would take lots of them and end up paying very little in taxes., So Congress, in effect, said, OK, let's keep the cherished deductions, but still make sure the rich pay their fair share. Wealthy Americans can figure out their taxes the regular way, taking whatever deductions that may apply to them. And then they can recalculate everything under a formula that sets a minimum amount of tax. The wealthy taxpayers will pay whichever amount of taxes is greater., But Congress did not build in an inflation escalator. And then it cut tax rates. The combined effect of higher inflation and lower rates played havoc with the intention of the AMT, allowing the parallel tax system to cover more and more middle-class families. A tax that was supposed to hit only the richest Americans must continually get updated or it will affect larger and larger numbers of average people., AMT Impact, Originally, the AMT was supposed to affect only the top taxpayers. These days, Congress patches it so that it hits around 5 million upper-middle-class households. Usually, those are families with children in high-cost states like New York and California., This year, unless Congress applies a new patch, the AMT will apply to nearly half of people with incomes of $75,000 to $100,000. Without action, an estimated 27 million more tax filers could find themselves paying an average of $3,700 more in taxes for 2012., And yes, the financial hit applies to this tax year. Even if the new, incoming Congress applies an AMT patch after January, experts say it will be an accounting nightmare. It's difficult to undo the tax once the filing season has begun in January, and at the least, it would result in long processing delays of all returns., The biggest and thorniest problem for the IRS and next year's filing season is the AMT patch, IRS Commissioner Doug Shulman said in a September speech to the American Bar Association., Raising taxes for tens of millions of middle-class Americans and delaying tax refunds for millions more would hurt consumer spending, economists say., AMT Politics, The AMT makes for a fine Exhibit A for anyone trying to make the case that the U.S. tax code is a mess. And that means it may have some positive political value as Congress struggles with the fiscal cliff and its tangled collection of expiring tax breaks. The AMT is so unpopular that lawmakers may be able to use its elimination as a kind of carrot to get lawmakers to move along toward compromise., On the other hand, often on Capitol Hill, dangling a juicy carrot in front of lawmakers can hurt negotiations as each side scrambles to grab it first and hold tight., If patching the AMT were the only thing out there, it would get done, says Eric Toder, co-director of the Tax Policy Center, a nonpartisan research group. But as part of a grand bargain on taxes and spending, this could get tied up in the negotiations, he warns., So why does Congress annually put itself through this weird exercise of having to patch the AMT? Why not just eliminate it?, Toder says the problem is that the AMT if unpatched generates loads of theoretical tax revenues in coming years. When Congress puts together the annual federal budget and projects deficits into the future, it knows that having an unpatched AMT will make the fiscal future look brighter. But each year, Congress does not allow those projected revenues to actually come into Treasury coffers because it patches the AMT., In other words, the AMT exists today to make Congress look less inept at budgeting in the future, Toder says. They can only afford to kill it a year at a time, he says. It's a mess.
Model S Alpha, in black, and the Telsa Roadster behind it., Model S Alpha, in black, and the Telsa Roadster behind it., Motor Trend named Tesla's Model S as its Car of the Year. It is the first time in the award's 64-year history the honor goes to a car without an internal combustion engine., The Tesla Model S floored our panel of judges, Edward Loh, Editor-in-Chief of Motor Trend said in a press release. The goal of the award is to name the car that best meets our six criteria, and the Tesla Model S accomplished that best. It is a testament not only to the luxury sedan and electric car segment, but to American engineering overall., Loh stars in a video introducing the Tesla. It shows an elegant sedan that he says runs as smooth and effortless as a Rolls Royce. It shows off the 17-inch center-console touch screen and the powerful engine that can do zero-to-60 in 3.9 seconds., Loh says that he drove from Los Angeles to Las Vegas and back 212 miles on a single charge., If you're thinking that the Model S sounds like your kind of car, the price tag is just as stunning: Depending on battery options and upgrades the car runs from $49,900 to $97,900., If you remember, Tesla became a subject in the presidential race when Gov. Mitt Romney accused President Obama of backing losers like Tesla and Solyndra., Fox News reports that during the celebration of the Motor Trend honor, Tesla CEO Elon Musk made reference to the Romney quip., Fox reports:, Musk contrasted the Model S, the winner of the award, to the loser remark made during the campaign&mdash;by parsing the comment grammatically., Mr. Romney, he suggested, had gotten the object, but not the subject of the remark right., A standing-room-only crowd of Tesla owners and depositors laughed and cheered his comment.
Waves break Oct. 31 in front of a destroyed amusement park wrecked by Hurricane Sandy in Seaside Heights, N.J., Hurricane Sandy left a long trail of destruction across the New Jersey shoreline. And it did a lot more than just flood houses., What remains of the 1.2-mile boardwalk sits on the beach on Oct. 30 in Belmar, N.J., What remains of the 1.2-mile boardwalk sits on the beach on Oct. 30 in Belmar, N.J., In towns like Seaside Heights and Belmar, Sandy wiped out the boardwalks that line the beach. In places like these, boardwalks served as the commercial center knitting the towns together, and residents are wondering where to go from here., Until two weeks ago, the boardwalk was the place to hang out in Belmar, N.J. Ann Summer was walking along the water with her husband this weekend., I think it was part of the heart of Belmar. Any time of year if it was a nice day, all of a sudden it would look like summer. There would be people jogging, riding bikes, walking their dogs, sitting on the boardwalk, reading newspapers ... there were always people on the boardwalk, Summer says., That all ended when Sandy came to town. The storm splintered most of the boardwalk and scattered the pieces all over the shoreline., Shaun McGrath and Peter Franconeri were standing along Ocean Avenue this weekend surveying the damage., I couldn't get out of my house. The boardwalk was at my front door so I couldn't open my front door, McGrath said., The boardwalk was loosened, right? And in one wave it was just picked up and brought here, in one wave, Franconeri said., Yeah, McGrath said. , Pieces of the boardwalk now sit in the front yard of Franconeri's condo complex. Franconeri asks me if I want to take one home as a souvenir., You want a small piece? I'm serious. We're going to take a piece and write 'Gone to the beach' on it, Franconeri says., Not far away sits a bench that once sat on the boardwalk and was swept here by the floodwaters. The storm wiped out a pavilion that served as a kind of community center. It also destroyed whole restaurants and stores that once lined the boardwalk., The destruction of the boardwalk is likely to be felt by Belmar businesses for a long time. The Mayfair Hotel sits across the street from what was once the boardwalk. The storm tore the siding off the building and flooded a basement clubroom. Today there are huge mountains of sand and debris blocking access to the beach. Owner Pat Entwistle has stopped accepting most guests., Devastated. Right now, I'm sure right now no one would want to come here to stay, except the workers from out of town, Entwistle says., The same kind of destruction can be seen up and down the coast. In Seaside Heights, the boardwalk was largely swept out to sea and an iconic roller coaster was destroyed. Ironically, the most famous boardwalk of all, in Atlantic City, was largely spared. Over the weekend, the city held a kind of mass stroll along the boardwalk to publicize the fact that it was still standing., City officials say the boardwalk was spared in part because of a dune reclamation project that blocked the water from coming too far inland. Still, Liza Cartmell, president of the Atlantic City Alliance, says many people think the boardwalk took a big hit., Tourism is down. Cartmell says many of the city's tourists usually come from New York and New Jersey, and they have other things on their minds right now., I mean, people just weren't ready. They were sweating their electricity, they couldn't leave their house. In the north, they were in gas lines. So it was a huge impact to us, Cartmell says., New Jersey officials say they will rebuild the boardwalks in places like Belmar. But with so much destruction, it could take years to complete. Gov. Chris Christie said last week that the rebuilding needs to be done in a smarter way to protect the beaches the next time a bad storm hits.
In the wake of last Tuesday's elections, a lively debate has erupted into the open over whether conservatives and the Republican Party were well-served by their favorite media outlets., Former Gov. Mitt Romney was reported to have been so certain of a victory on Tuesday night that he cast aside tradition and did not draft a concession speech. But conservatives now say his misplaced confidence and theirs were bolstered by the predictions of many like-minded pundits, which were broadcast and posted online around the clock by sympathetic news outlets., You had this kind of mutually reinforcing phenomenon going on between the Romney campaign [and] some influential commentators and then a lot of that commentary gets repeated in the media at large, said Byron York, chief political correspondent for the conservative Washington Examiner., York said that stunned Republicans at Romney's Boston headquarters told him they were influenced by the results of surveys conducted by the campaign's pollster, Neil Newhouse, and by what they heard on the air and saw in print., Similarly, conservative columnist John Podhoretz of the New York Post had argued before the election that many pollsters were ignoring the high turnout by Republicans in the 2010 elections that swept the GOP into control of the U.S. House. The 2012 race would be the same, proving Obama's 2008 win to be an anomaly, Podhoretz argued quite mistakenly, as he conceded afterward., Because I had a rooting interest in the other side, that view was strengthened and amplified by what I wanted to happen, which I freely confess, said Podhoretz, also the editor of the conservative Commentary magazine and a cultural critic for the conservative Weekly Standard. People don't ordinarily cast a skeptical eye on data and information that supports their opinions. They're happy to take it., The noted conservative political analyst Michael Barone and conservative columnist George Will were among those predicting a landslide in the electoral college for Romney. But they were far from alone. Viewers consumed a steady diet of such punditry on Fox News for weeks ahead of the election. Former House Speaker Newt Gingrich and ambidextrous political consultant Dick Morris (a consultant to a Democratic president, Bill Clinton, and a Republican Senate Majority Leader, Trent Lott) additionally promised landslides in the popular vote for Romney. Former chief George W. Bush strategist Karl Rove, who is now a top analyst for Fox and a top fundraiser for a political action committee that spent $300 million against President Obama and his fellow Democrats, predicted a comfortable but closer win for Romney., Many conservatives argued the polls themselves were skewed because they showed a Democratic edge nationally and a strong advantage in key battleground states. And indeed, Podhoretz and other conservatives contended that liberals and their sympathizers in the press corps clicked on Nate Silver's 538 blog in the New York Times hour after hour not because of their fascination with the mathematical probabilities but out of a desperate need for reassurance that President Obama would win re-election., But in the days after Obama cruised to victory, former George W. Bush speechwriter David Frum accused right-of-center media outlets and partisan pundits of failing their audiences by cheerleading for the GOP rather than reflecting what was actually happening in the race or in the nation at large., The conservative followership has been fleeced, exploited and lied to by the conservative entertainment complex, Frum said on MSNBC's Morning Joe., Pressed to name names, Frum demurred, though he has pointed to Fox News and Rush Limbaugh in the past. Frum argued the conservative media have failed their audiences by cheerleading rather reflecting what was actually happening in the race or in the nation at large., The activists are so mistaken about the nature of the problems the country faces, Frum said. I went to Tea Party rallies, and I would ask this question: Have taxes gone up or down in the past four years? They could not answer that question correctly., Host Joe Scarborough a former Republican congressman seconded Frum's critique and said he was reminded of what happened when the German army overtook France in 1940. The French generals [were] reassuring [British Prime Minister Winston] Churchill day after day, week after week that the French were putting up a brave defense, when they knew the war was already lost., On election night, Rove was in constant contact with Romney's people and proved so flustered by the results that he vigorously disputed the conclusion of Fox News' decision desk that Obama had won Ohio and thereby won the election. A nonplused Megyn Kelly responded: Is this just math that you do as a Republican to make yourself feel better, or is this real?, The backlash has only strengthened in the days since the election. Younger political right-of-center operatives and pundits told Politico's Jonathan Martin that the reliance on clearly conservative media outlets and pundits such as Newsmax, Rush Limbaugh's radio program, and the opinion shows on Fox News had undermined their understanding of where the campaign stood., Unfortunately, for us Republicans who want to rebuild this party, the echo chamber [now] is louder and more difficult to overcome, former Kentucky Secretary of State Trey Grayson, who unsuccessfully ran against Rand Paul two years ago for the Republican nomination for Senate, told Martin., Martin reported that Grayson's mentor, Kentucky Sen. Mitch McConnell, unsuccessfully pleaded with Fox News Chairman Roger Ailes to give his candidate as much time on the air as Paul, a firebrand conservative libertarian popular among Tea Party fans and many Fox viewers. Sorry, Ailes is said to have responded: Paul is better TV.
Chris Costa and one of her chickens on her farm in Downingtown, Pa. Costa and her partner, T.J., found the land for this farm through a sustainable agriculture program., Chris Costa and one of her chickens on her farm in Downingtown, Pa. Costa and her partner, T.J., found the land for this farm through a sustainable agriculture program., Many farmers want their farms to be located close to a city - especially organic farmers who'd like to sell their produce at big urban farmers markets. But the price of land within range of a big city is sky high and only getting higher., Most small farmers buy their land, but some are now looking to lease in suburban or exurban areas. And to do that, they're using something straight out of Fiddler On The Roof: A matchmaker., Marilyn Anthony is one such matchmaker. When we started this program, she says, we did sort of jokingly refer to it as 'eFarmony.', Anthony is with the Pennsylvania Association for Sustainable Agriculture. She's trying to match owners of underutilized land outside Philadelphia and people who want to farm. In this case, the match would take the form of a lease., Eleanor Morris Illoway samples greens from farmland that she leased to organic farmers., Eleanor Morris Illoway samples greens from farmland that she leased to organic farmers., While leasing is common among big factory farms of corn or soybeans, Anthony says many small farmers are cool to the idea. And she says the landowners aren't too crazy about it either., No matter who we spoke with, whether it was aspiring farmers or landowners, the notion of leasing land ... seemed uncomfortable, she says., Many organic farmers put in years of labor improving the soil they farm, and no one wants to see all that labor go to waste if their landlord decides not to renew the lease., But even among farmers who do decide the risks of leasing are worth it, setting up that kind of arrangement can be difficult on their own., T.J. Costa, an aspiring farmer, says he and his partner did their own search for space two years ago to expand what was, at that point, a giant organic vegetable garden., Originally we drafted a letter that we were going to drop in mailboxes, he says. There's a number of big open fields that, just driving around, didn't look well utilized. ... Let's drop a note in here's who we are, here's what we're looking for would you be interested?, The phone never rang., That's where Anthony comes in. Her job is to convince skeptical landowners that organic farming would be a good way to utilize their land, and to convince skeptical organic farmers that leasing is the most affordable way to expand their business., She hosts events where landowners and aspiring farmers can meet each other - kind of like speed dating, but for agriculture., Anthony's program is based in southeastern Pennsylvania, but she says there are other programs similar to hers in Ohio and in New York's Hudson Valley., Eventually, Costa found some land to lease through the sustainable agriculture program. He was able to create a farm-share program that allows city dwellers to purchase a percentage of his farm's produce and stop by each week to pick it up., No matter what happens and what the weather is, Costa says, that's a really huge avenue for support and encouragement and excitement. And so it really does make the hard work worth it., Other farmers out here are still looking. Got some space you're not using? Give them a call.
Last year, Congress passed legislation that among other things gave employers tax credits for hiring vets., Last year, Congress passed legislation that among other things gave employers tax credits for hiring vets., Many veterans aren't just looking for a job; they're looking for a career, a calling and, of course, financial stability. Those recently separated from the military have to confront what is still a fairly weak civilian job market., The unemployment rate for veterans serving after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks is 10 percent, about 2 percentage points higher than the overall rate. There is hope, however, and some employers are actively seeking to recruit veterans for what their unique skill sets can bring to an organization., Scott Kane, a 41-year-old vet who spent two decades in the Navy, knows plenty of former colleagues who struggled to find solid careers after leaving the military., Some of them did not transition well, he says., Kane was lucky, and his quest for a job led him to Eastern Virginia Medical School, where he is in a two-year program to become a physician assistant., Every once in a while take a peek at the job listings for physician assistants all around the country, and they are plentiful, he says., Daniel Thibodeau, who teaches at Eastern Virginia, says he is actively recruiting more veterans into the program. He does this by offering scholarships with money he received through the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and by recognizing relevant military experience., We have an equivalent rating that we give them as far as some of the course work that they've taken while in the military, and some of the certifications that they've had, Thibodeau says. So it's less of a burden to where they have to do more prerequisite work that is needed in order to get into the physician assistant program., Last year, Congress passed legislation that among other things gave employers tax credits for hiring vets. But investment firm Edward Jones seeks out veterans because they have a good track record., We have a concerted effort to hire military veterans because we know the skill set very well, says Matt Doran, a general partner at Edward Jones whose job it is to recruit veterans to the firm., We already have 1,300 financial advisers at Edward Jones who have a military background, he says. So we like the skill sets, we know the competencies and we think it translates very well to work as a financial adviser., Those skills include the ability to plan, organize and put an emphasis on results and service., In addition to the standard classes and certification, Doran says his firm gives vets an additional two months of apprenticeship-style training modeled after the military's own job-shadowing programs. So far this year, Edward Jones has hired 323 vets as financial advisers more than in the previous three years., With the reduction in forces, we see a large, talented candidate pool that is diverse and mobile; all branches of the service are attractive to us, he says., That attracted Rob Smith, a 20-year veteran of the Marines who joined Edward Jones this year, after looking for other jobs., I spent six months looking for jobs with my background, Smith says, and it was just really tough to find something that wouldn't move my family all over the place again, that I thought I could really turn into another career., Smith, who is now a financial adviser, says he doesn't anticipate ever leaving his firm. But, if he did, he now has the certification and skills he can use anywhere else.
A second term means some new Cabinet appointments for President Obama, including at the Treasury. After four pretty grueling years, Secretary Timothy Geithner has made it clear he will be leaving Washington., White House press secretary Jay Carney said last week that Geithner would be staying on through the inauguration. He's also expected to be a key participant in fiscal cliff negotiations., The Treasury secretary was arguably the most important Cabinet post in the first Obama administration. Geithner had wobbly banks, auto bailouts and the Great Recession on his plate. The next secretary will face big challenges too, beginning with the fiscal cliff and working with Republicans to craft a grand bargain on deficit reduction., It's not surprising that there's been a lot of talk about Erskine Bowles as a replacement for Geithner. Bowles was chairman of the president's deficit reduction panel, the Simpson-Bowles commission. Speaking on Charlie Rose's show last March, Bowles outlined the content of a good budget deal., Any of them that don't address defense, any of them that don't address Medicare, Medicaid, Social Security and don't reform the tax code and aren't balanced in some way between that, aren't serious, he said., Bowles was a chief of staff for President Clinton. He's also a former investment banker and is popular with Republicans and on Wall Street. But hehas criticized President Obama's budget publicly while praising Paul Ryan's., A more likely choice might be Jack Lew, the current White House chief of staff and formerly the president's budget director. In April 2011, he discussed overhauling Social Security:, It's never really moved the debate forward for one side or another to put a plan out there. It's only really worked well when the parties come together; that's what happened in 1983, he said., Lew worked on that 1983 Social Security fix as an aide to House Speaker Tip O'Neill. He has Capitol Hill experience and the budget expertise to tackle the big issues that are on the Treasury's plate. And he's got a good working relationship with the president.
President Obama and House Speaker John Boehner at the White House in July 2011. They are scheduled to meet at the White House again next week to discuss the looming fiscal cliff., President Obama and House Speaker John Boehner at the White House in July 2011. They are scheduled to meet at the White House again next week to discuss the looming fiscal cliff., This week, President Obama will meet with congressional leaders to begin working out a deal to avert a budget calamity commonly known as the fiscal cliff., Economists are unanimous in saying that if the leaders fail to keep the country from going over the cliff, both the stock and labor markets will fairly quickly go splat., To keep that from happening, Congress must pass legislation to stop or delay or phase in looming budgetary changes. That phrase fiscal cliff refers to a massive collection of automatic tax increases and spending cuts that kick in at year's end. If they are all allowed to take full effect, it would be like tying a $600 billion weight to the economy., The problem is that Democrats want to fix some of the issues by increasing taxes on the wealthiest Americans, and Republicans oppose hikes in tax rates., We can't just cut our way to prosperity, Obama said Friday. We have to combine spending cuts with revenue and that means asking the wealthiest Americans to pay a little more in taxes., Before Obama spoke, House Speaker John Boehner, the top GOP leader in Washington, said House Republicans won't agree to higher rates but would be open to limiting tax breaks to raise revenues. It's clear there are all kinds of deductions, some of which make sense, some of which don't, he said., The two men seemed to be leaving themselves room to negotiate. Whether they will compromise is unknown. But economists and investment experts say one thing is clear: that failure to do so would derail the recovery., Absolutely there will be an economic reversal unless Congress acts, said Garth Friesen, who serves on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's Investor Advisory Committee. He also is a top investment officer for III Associates, a hedge fund., Every American who earns a paycheck or owns stock will get hit with higher taxes, Friesen said. That's across the board from the lowest taxpayers to the wealthiest, he said. It's everybody., And while some of the changes may take a while to be fully felt, many are like a light switch, Friesen said. The tax hikes will switch on as New Year's parties end., IHS Global Insight, a forecasting firm, says that if Congress and the White House were to hit an impasse, it would be a recipe for turmoil in the financial markets., Here are some ways that that economy will get hit:, Payroll tax cut. To give consumers more cash to spend, Congress lowered payroll taxes by 2 percentage points during 2011 and 2012. For someone making $50,000 a year, that worked out to about $20 a week. If the tax holiday ends abruptly, take-home pay will immediately shrink., Bush tax cuts. On Jan. 1, all of the tax cuts that were phased in, starting in 2001, will expire. That will mean higher taxes on both income and investments., Unemployment benefits. Ever since the economy tanked in 2008, Congress has been extending benefits beyond the standard 26 weeks. Those extensions will end in the new year, so lots of job seekers will be on their own in January., Depreciation incentives. Businesses will lose special depreciation allowances that encouraged capital equipment purchases., Spending cuts. Unless Congress changes the law, automatic spending cuts worth $1.2 trillion over a decade will kick in. They hit particularly hard at military spending, so many people who work for contractors will lose jobs., What would all of that do to the economy? A study by J.P. Morgan Asset Management said that this amount of fiscal drag would push the U.S. economy into recession., And that, the company concluded, would lead to a very unhappy U.S. population., As negotiations begin this week, here are terms that are likely to be used a lot., The action of taking legal possession of something. For example, a judge can sequester a jury, i.e., hold it in isolation in a hotel, until a trial is over. In the case of the federal budget, Congress passed legislation in 2011 that ordered the Treasury to, in effect, sequester the budget authority that would allow the government to spend $109 billion on defense and domestic programs in 2013. This sequestration process is scheduled to continue each year until the Treasury has saved about $1.2 trillion to help hold down the national debt. Lawmakers had hoped that by setting up these broad, automatic spending cuts, they would motivate themselves to find more carefully considered trims. But Congress has not passed a deficit-reduction package, or passed legislation to end sequestration. So the deadline is drawing closer as the year winds down., A government's annual income. Most revenue comes from taxes, but some comes from fees and other sources such as sales of assets. To balance the budget, government must either increase its streams of revenue and/or cut spending. Many Democrats say they are willing to pass certain spending cuts, especially for military spending. But Republicans have opposed any tax rate increases. After the election, however, House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, said Republicans are now willing to accept new revenue under the right conditions ... a simpler, cleaner, fairer tax code, with fewer loopholes and lower rates for all., The national debt is the total of all the financial obligations the federal government failed to pay off in the past. Each year, the government takes in revenue and then pays its bills. Those bills include the repayment of money borrowed from bondholders, salaries of federal workers, payments to contractors, and so on. Ideally, the revenue coming in to the Treasury should be the same, or even greater, than the amount being paid out. But that balance rarely happens. Far more often, the government spends more than it makes, so it has to borrow yet more money to get through the year. That creates an annual budget deficit. Those deficits pile up year after year, and collectively, they add up to the national debt, which is about $16 trillion now.
Nickelback's Chad Kroeger performs during halftime of a Canadian football game in Vancouver. On the band's own tours, expensive pyrotechnics are more rare., Nickelback's Chad Kroeger performs during halftime of a Canadian football game in Vancouver. On the band's own tours, expensive pyrotechnics are more rare., Nickelback. The name itself is musical shorthand for everything music aficionados love to hate about modern rock., But with more than 50 million record sales worldwide and a lead singer who earns $10 million a year, the band is laughing all the way to the bank as reporter Ben Paynter describes in Bloomberg Businessweek Magazine., To start with, Paynter tells weekends on All Things Considered host Guy Raz, the band has worked hard to become ubiquitous in the blue-collar rock scene. You can hear them on the entry songs for World Wrestling Entertainment, commercials for NASCAR's Speed Channel and Michael Bay's bombastic Transformers movie. The band even struck a strategic promotional alliance to have some of their music played during Stanley Cup highlight videos., If something's getting punched, smashed, broken or otherwise causing chaos, Nickelback is usually the background soundtrack to it, Paynter says., The band also tours on the cheap, under a promotional deal with Live Nation that rivals that of Jay-Z and Madonna. Lead singer Chad Kroeger is an incredibly prolific songwriter, Paynter says, who co-owns 604 Records, the Canadian label that spawned Carly Rae Jepsen's monster summer hit, Call Me Maybe. Paytner says the label takes a lot of chances on young, Canadian talent., They just work on building them up in Canada and launching them in the United States, he says., As for the band's take on its divisive reputation, Paynter spent some time with them and concluded they don't seem to mind much., These guys know exactly what they do. They do it to a T. They pack stadiums because of it. And they've worked real hard to get to that point.
Lockheed Martin announced that its board of directors asked for the resignation of Christopher E. Kubasik, 51, the current chief operating officer and incoming chief executive office., Former Lockheed Martin President and Chief Operating Officer Christopher E. Kubasik., Former Lockheed Martin President and Chief Operating Officer Christopher E. Kubasik., Kubasik, previously slated to become CEO in January, resigned after an ethics investigation confirmed that he had a close personal relationship with a subordinate employee, Lockeheed said in a statement. His actions violated the company's Code of Ethics and Business Conduct, but did not affect the company's operational or financial performance., Marillyn A. Hewson, 58, president and COO, will become CEO on Jan. 1., While I am deeply disappointed and saddened by Chris' actions, which have been inconsistent with our values and standards, our swift response to his improper conduct demonstrates our unyielding commitment to holding every employee accountable for their actions, Robert J. Stevens, the current chairman and CEO, said in a statement.
With Congress on the edge of a fiscal cliff, set to occur Jan. 1, some say a fiscal plunge is exactly what's needed to break the political logjam., With Congress on the edge of a fiscal cliff, set to occur Jan. 1, some say a fiscal plunge is exactly what's needed to break the political logjam., Now that the election is over, Washington is transfixed by the fiscal cliff, the automatic tax increases and spending cuts due to take effect Jan. 1 if nothing is done., The sudden shock could seriously damage the economy., But some Democrats and policy analysts are suggesting that going over the fiscal cliff could help break the political logjam., Rep. Peter Welch, D-Vt., says it's not his first option, but he thinks Democrats should be willing to go over the fiscal cliff if Republicans continue to refuse to raise taxes., I think the Democrats have to take advantage of the fact that there is leverage here, Welch says., Washington Democratic Sen. Patty Murray holds a similar view, as does liberal commentator Paul Krugman, the Nobel Prize-winning economist., The leverage provided by a fiscal plunge includes the threat to Republicans that one of their biggest legislative accomplishments of the past decade, the Bush-era tax cuts, would automatically be rolled back., William Gale, co-director of the Tax Policy Center, also thinks a ride over the fiscal cliff is a viable strategy. Despite the serious risks to the economy, he says it could change the terms of the debate and create a path to taming the nation's deficits., If we do go over the cliff, lawmakers will be on a budget path that deals with the deficit quite well over the medium term and the long term, Gale says., That's because there would be a huge amount of revenue added to the budget if the Bush tax cuts expire. That would reduce the deficit significantly. The same goes for the cuts in domestic spending, including defense, that are part of the fiscal cliff. Those cuts would also substantially trim projected deficits for years to come., Going over the fiscal cliff does the dirty work that Congress has so far been unwilling to do, Gale says., He thinks Congress would quickly tidy up the dirty work., If lawmakers don't like the indiscriminate across-the-board cuts in defense spending or the national parks or Amtrak, he says, they could be renegotiated early next year., The higher tax rates on the wealthy that would come with the end of the Bush tax cuts could be lowered in exchange for ending some deductions for the rich. That's something Republicans could vote for., There's a silver lining for Republicans in this, Gale says. They would not be forced to vote for a tax increase. In fact, any votes on taxes after the fiscal plunge would more likely be votes for tax cuts, like restoring the Bush tax cuts for the middle class something both President Obama and the Republicans want., But there is danger for the economy in this strategy., There are problems with going over the fiscal cliff, and I don't want to minimize them, Gale says. In the short term, he says, the economy would take a hit, and I think we should enact a stimulus package to avoid that., Gale suggests a package that includes tax rebates and an extension of the payroll tax holiday that's also set to expire Jan. 1. He says federal aid to the states should also be part of a stimulus., There are concerns about the reaction in financial markets if the U.S. goes over the fiscal cliff. In the first two days after the election, that prospect helped push U.S. stocks down more than 3 percent., Gale has this response: It seems to me if we're making moves that are helping the economy in the short run via stimulus and getting ourselves on a good long-term budget path via going over the fiscal cliff, that that's exactly what markets are looking for., House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, suggested Friday that the two sides should push back the fiscal cliff to provide time to reach a grand budget agreement later in 2013., In his remarks Friday, Obama gave no indication he was prepared to do that.
Taylor Swift's fourth studio album, Red, sold 1.2 million copies in its first week, the highest first-week sales total in a decade., Taylor Swift's new album, Red, sold more 1.2 million copies in its first week the highest first-week sales total for an album in over a decade. She did it partly by answering a surprisingly complicated question: What's the best way to sell an album?, There are so many ways to release your music these days. You can sell it at Amazon, iTunes, Wal-Mart, and Starbucks. You can release it to streaming sites like Spotify. You can go on tour., Each artist chooses a mix of tools from this toolbox. And choosing the right mix can help an artist make money something that's hard to do in an era when it's so easy to get free music., Taylor Swift picked expertly. As Paul Resnikoff, editor and founder of Digital Music News points out, she has chosen from the toolbox only the outlets that would give her the most money for every album sold: Outlets that pushed a full album purchase., The first week her album came out, you could only get it in a few key places: i-tunes, Walgreens, Wal-Mart, Target. You could order a Papa Johns pizza and receive the CD at the sticker price of around 14 bucks., But the tools Swift didn't use are as important than the ones she did. By refusing to release her singles on Spotify, or any other streaming site, she pushed her fans to buy the album. Spotify pays the artist pennies on the dollar. Taylor Swift skipped it., Taylor already has so many fans, that she doesn't need to have that, like, incentive, 16-year-old superfan Lindsey Feinstein says. Like, 'Oh, listen to this, and then you'll buy it.' She's past that level., Streaming music is more like an advertisement for the artist. It's a process of music discovery, not necessarily music fandom. You build brand loyalty to the artist through streaming. Taylor Swift does not have a problem with brand loyalty. As Lindsey says, she's past that.
The so-called fiscal cliff is a double-edged sword, the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office says in a new report issued today., Why? Ignoring the huge tax increases and spending cuts set to take effect at the beginning of the year will probably cause the economy to fall back into a recession., But: They will make the economy stronger later in the decade and beyond., The fiscal cliff, by the way, is a self-inflicted wound. It represents a confluence of events that have been set up by Washington's inability to come up with a grand bargain. The Bush tax cuts, for example, have been extended piece-meal and are set to expire again in January., Also, remember the fight over increasing the debt ceiling? That resulted in a bipartisan deal OK'd by the Senate, House and White House that would result in $2.1 trillion in savings by 2021., Part of deal called for budget caps that amounted to $917 billion in savings over a decade. The other part of the deal required a bipartisan group of 12 lawmakers to identify $1.5 trillion in additional cuts. The so-called supercommittee failed, so the law automatically triggers $1.2 trillion in across-the-board cuts that take effect beginning Jan. 1., In today's report, the CBO says if Congress does nothing and the U.S. jumps off the fiscal cliff, it would result in a huge reduction of the deficit. It would go from $1.1 trillion to $200 billion in 2022. The debt would decline to 58 percent of the GDP in 2022., On the other hand, if Congress decides to extend the Bush tax cuts and throws out the $1.2 trillion in across-the-board cuts, annual deficits would average nearly 5 percent of GDP over the next decade, and debt held by the public would increase to 90 percent of GDP 10 years from now and keep rising rapidly thereafter., We'll stop with the numbers and leave you with the big, easy-to-understand picture: Congress, the CBO says, has to rein in the debt or the country faces a higher likelihood of fiscal crisis or, for example, an inability to respond to unexpected challenges., In essence, there are two ways to rein in debt: cut spending significantly on big ticket items like Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid and defense, or keep those programs intact and significantly raise taxes on everyone., Ultimately, significant deficit reduction is likely to require a combination of policies, many of which may stand in stark contrast to policies now in place, the CBO says., In other words: a compromise between the two., Update at 5:46 p.m. ET. The Fiscal Cliff: , The CBO also issued a separate report specifically on the different fiscal cliff scenarios. That can be found here.
This field is part of a 160-acre tract in Saline County, Mo., that sold for $10,700 per acre in February double what it would have gone for five years ago., This field is part of a 160-acre tract in Saline County, Mo., that sold for $10,700 per acre in February double what it would have gone for five years ago., Howard Audsley has been driving through Missouri for the past 30 years to assess the value of farmland. Barreling down the flat roads of Saline County on a recent day, he stopped his truck at a 160-acre tract of newly tilled black land. The land sold in February for $10,700 per acre, double what it would have gone for five years ago., Heading out into the field, Audsley picked up a clod of the dirt that makes this pocket of land some of the priciest in the state., This is a very loamy, very productive, but loamy soil, Audsley said. A high-clay soil will just be like a rock and that's the difference between the ... soils. And the farmers know this and the investors know this. That's why they pay for it what they do., A Steep Surge In Prices, It's not just the value of Missouri cropland that's rising. Corn Belt farmland prices from Iowa to Illinois and Nebraska to Kansas have been sky-high lately, boosted by $8-a-bushel corn., Click the map to see how the price of farmland has gone up. Produced by Harvest Public Media., The high commodity prices have helped encourage investors like Steve Diggle, who have no connection to farming, to compete for their very own acreage in the Heartland., We paid about $3.3 million for [about 650 acres] in Southeast Illinois in 2009, said Diggle, who is the CEO of Singapore-based Vulpes Investment Management. The company handles $250 million of investor money, about 15 percent of which is in farmland., This year we sold it at auction and we got $5.1 million, he said, referring to the Illinois farmland. That's 55 percent higher than we paid. Plus we got two yields one of 3.5 percent and one of 5 percent. So, you know, as an investment, that's 63 percent over three years. [It] is great and we're extremely happy with it., Diggle says his firm also purchased a 1,400-acre tract in Illinois two years ago. The company plans to hold on to it to make money through cash rents and land appreciation., The value of your land may go up or down. But as long as bond prices remain where they are, it's very hard to see how we'll have a sustained bear market for agriculture, Diggle said. By comparison, he said, the extremely low returns in the bond market are just so inferior., A Safer Investment, You don't have to be a billionaire to invest in farmland., Physics professor Andy Trupin, who lives in Delray Beach, Fla., bought a 155-acre tract of farmland in Lebo, Kan., two years ago because it looked like it would make him more money than gold or the stock market. He also owns another tract that's primarily pastureland., Farmland seemed like a much safer vehicle to get an income stream even though ... it's not a high-income stream. At least it's more than you would get on Treasuries at any duration, Trupin said. And at the same time, [farmland offers] price appreciation or to at least [holds] its value in the event of an inflation period., The investment has paid off so far, Trupin said. He rented out the land to a local farmer who grows corn, soybeans and wheat. Even the brutal drought failed to knock down the investment., Amazingly we managed to get 20 bushels to the acre of corn even though the place was as dry as Las Vegas last year, Trupin said. I'm willing to let the income from this thing fluctuate. In bad years, it's a slight loss maybe a couple of thousand on the year and in good years, you gain up to $10,000 on it., Trupin found the land online and got help purchasing it by Realty Executives of Kansas City. The company says 90 percent of its new customers are investors like Trupin, and it holds seminars for investors that walk them through the process of evaluating and buying farmland and how to find local farmers to rent the land., There's probably a higher percentage now of people who are strictly investors, stock market people, money-market-type investors, and ... they're buying all types of land, said Dale Hermreck, a broker for Realty Executives who says he sold $21 million worth of farmland in Kansas last year., We have a lot of outside interest from Texas, Chicago, New York, Hermreck said. I get calls and inquiries all over the United States., The Specter Of A Bubble, But to University of Missouri agriculture economist Ron Plain all of this sounds a bit like the housing bubble burst of 2006. He is concerned a similar bubble could be happening in farmland., You get several years going up faster than that long-term trend of 6 percent [annual increases] and you're then in a situation where you're sort of due for a correction, Plain said. And the way you correct is pull those land values down or 'pop the bubble' ... and so there's concern about that and it's kind of reasonable to worry., Plain said that with mortgage rates at their lowest in 60 years, it's reasonable to expect the cost of borrowing to go up eventually. And if crop prices retreat from record highs, he said, that means less income per acre and therefore less ability to pay for farmland., Should a bubble burst, farmland might be harder to sell, especially compared with other more liquid investments. But investors argue that any bubble is still far off, and they believe that farm acreage will remain a solid long-term investment so long as the demand for food continues to grow., It remains to be seen whether investors will be able to compete with farmers for the small supply of high-quality cropland available in the Midwest, says broker Hermreck., I have people call me all the time and I just don't have what they're looking for, Hermreck said. Simply supply and demand. It's just not there. I could sell an awful lot more of this land if it was available. And people seem to hang on to something that's making some money and real popular. It's just real popular now to own land., Abbie Fentress Swanson reports from Missouri for Harvest Public Media, an agriculture-reporting project involving six NPR member stations in the Midwest. For more stories about farm and food, check out harvestpublicmedia.org.,
The news is spreading that Twitter is warning quite a few users that their accounts may have been compromised and that they should immediately change their passwords., TechCrunch says, keep your eyes peeled Twitter users: Twitter is sending out emails to some of its users telling them it has reset their password and asking them to create a new one., Not surprisingly, many folks are using Twitter to sound the alarm., What's happened?, Twitter isn't saying, so far (note at 12:25 p.m. ET: see update below). The Tweet Smarter blog notes that:, These emails often go out when large numbers of Twitter accounts have been hijacked. Sometimes, just to be safe, Twitter will even send these to accounts that have NOT been hijacked, trying to make sure to catch everyone that HAS been hijacked., Voice of America says there might be a connection to China, where Communist Party officials are beginning the process of choosing a new leader:, Several China-based foreign journalists and analysts are reporting an attempted hacking of their Twitter accounts, as China's Communist Party begins a sensitive meeting that will set in motion a once-a-decade leadership transition., Twitter sent emails early Thursday warning an unknown number of users that their accounts may have been compromised by a website or service not associated with Twitter. The email did not specify who carried out the hacking attempt. It was also sent to several China watchers based outside of the mainland., Update at 12:25 p.m. ET. Twitter Says It Unintentionally Reset Passwords Of Many Accounts., There's now a statement from Twitter, which says in part that:, In this case, we unintentionally reset passwords of a larger number of accounts, beyond those that we believed to have been compromised. We apologize for any inconvenience or confusion this may have caused.
The golden arches at a McDonald's restaurant in Miami., The golden arches at a McDonald's restaurant in Miami., Fast-food giant McDonald's said today that revenue at its restaurants that have been open at least 13 months fell 1.8 percent in October the first time it has suffered a month-to-month decline in that key indicator since April 2008, according to BloombergBusinessweek., As The Associated Press says, the figure is a key metric because it strips out the impact of newly opened and closed locations. It's a snapshot of money spent on food at both company-owned and franchised restaurants and does not reflect corporate revenue., Dow Jones Newswires writes that the chain is struggling to combat slowing consumer demand amid ongoing economic uncertainty. One way McDonald's is responding is to push its Dollar Menu of low-cost options. I am confident that our strategies and the adjustments we are making in response to the current business headwinds will build sales momentum and drive sustained, profitable growth, company President and Chief Executive Don Thompson says.
Job-related booklets at a New York State Department of Labor Employment Services office in Brooklyn., Job-related booklets at a New York State Department of Labor Employment Services office in Brooklyn., There were 355,000 first-time claims for unemployment insurance last week, down by 8,000 from the week before, the Employment and Training Administration says., But a measure designed to show the trend edged up: The 4-week moving average was 370,500, an increase of 3,250 from the previous week's unrevised average of 367,250., And, The Associated Press says, the week-over-week decline might have been due in part to Superstorm Sandy: Some people who might have applied for benefits couldn't because of the damage the storm inflicted on parts of New Jersey, New York and surrounding states.
A growing number of U.S. consumers are finding much to enjoy in this fruity alcoholic beverage, driving an increase in cider sales. The Vermont Hard Cider Company now produces 70,000 cases of Woodchuck Hard Cider each week., A couple hundred years ago. hard apple cider used to be the drink of choice for thirsty Americans. It was easy to make and easy to find. But as people moved into cities, and beer became more popular, cider fell out of fashion., Now it's come roaring back. U.S. hard cider sales are up 65 percent over last year, and just about all the big beer companies sell it, as well as many artisan brewers. Finding cider at your local bar is often no longer a problem., Among the impressive assortment of beer taps at Two Brothers Tavern in Middlebury, Vt., for example, is one that is bright green and shaped like an apple. Sales have probably doubled, tripled in the last two or three years, says Two Brothers bartender Andy Buxton. It used to be nothing. But nowadays probably 30 percent of people who are coming in here are demanding cider, not just asking for it. Even our locals who are drinking Budweiser are starting to switch over to a little bit of cider., Amanda Geiger of Binghamton, N.Y., began drinking hard cider a few years ago. I think pretty much everywhere you go you see at least one cider on tap now., And she says there's a tremendous variety in flavor. It's not all like sweet apple juice with a kick [there's] more variety. You've got your drier ones, your sweeter ones, you've got your spiced ones. And I just think there's more room for everyone's taste in there., Cider's popularity has evolved since the late '80s, when the rise of microbrewed beers began, sparking a renewed interest in small batch brewing. But it's only in the last few years that cider's popularity has exploded nationwide, attracting marketing giants like Miller Coors and Anheuser-Busch., Andrea Riberi, a beverage analyst for Nielsen, the market research firm, says it helps that cider appeals to both sexes. It's gluten free and seen as something new. People who were born in the '80s and '90s which we call millennials they really want what's new, they're always looking for the next big thing, she says., And the next big thing is hard cider, often with new flavor and fruit variations, such as pomegranate and pumpkin., According to business advisors at SymphonyIRI Group, U.S. cider sales for the last 12 months were just shy of $90 million., Leading the pack is Woodchuck Hard Cider, which was first bottled in 1991 in a small cidery in tiny Proctorsville, Vt. Today, Woodchuck's bottling plant employs 125 people and cranks out 70,000 cases of hard cider a week. Bret Williams bought the company in 2003 and says he's watched as the U.S. cider market has gone from a 4-million-case category to 7-million., When I started with the company way back when, all [we] heard was no, Williams says. People didn't know what hard cider was. Now it's gone from fringe behavior to a very small movement. But it's becoming powerful. People are incredibly passionate about Woodchuck., While Americans still don't drink nearly as much cider as folks in the United Kingdom, where cider never lost its appeal, Williams thinks there's plenty of room for growth. The whole cider category is only 0.2 percent of the beer market, and in England and Ireland, it's 15 to 20 percent. So there is so much upward traction for the category, it's almost mind numbing, he says., While industry analysts doubt the U.S. market for cider will ever be as big as the U.K.'s, Ireland's C&C; Group, which makes the cider brand Magners, is more bullish. So bullish, in fact, that the company has announced plans to buy Woodchuck for $305 million.
Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, said Wednesday that House Republicans are willing to accept new revenues under the right conditions., Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, said Wednesday that House Republicans are willing to accept new revenues under the right conditions., With the election over, attention in Washington has turned to the nation's debt and deficit challenges most immediately the looming fiscal cliff. That's the $600 billion worth of expiring tax breaks and automatic spending cuts set to start taking effect Jan. 1., The president and Congress agreed to those automatic measures to force themselves to find a more palatable compromise to rein in deficits. On Wednesday, there was an attempt to jump-start that process., In his victory speech Tuesday night in Chicago, President Obama signaled his desire to find a compromise. He said the priorities for his second term include deficit reduction. Eighteen hours later at the Capitol, House Speaker John Boehner offered the president a tentative olive branch., Mr. President, the Republican majority here in the House stands ready to work with you, to do what's best for our country, Boehner said., Last year, Boehner's House Republicans steadfastly refused to raise taxes to reach the balanced deficit-reducing budget compromise sought by the president, one that included both tax increases and spending cuts. On Wednesday, Boehner suggested that had changed., For the purposes of forging a bipartisan agreement that begins to solve the problem, we're willing to accept new revenue under the right conditions, he said. What matters is where the increased revenue comes from and what type of reform comes with it., Boehner suggested he was talking about revenues that flowed from closing tax loopholes and lowering rates and increasing growth., Rep. Chris Van Hollen of Maryland, the top Democrat on the House Budget Committee, was skeptical., I would say to the speaker and House Republicans, let's put your plan on the table, he said. Van Hollen said Obama has made clear he's willing to work on a compromise, but Van Hollen said is afraid Boehner's offer is much like those made by Republicans before., In the past, whenever they've talked about tax reform as part of a revenue-raising measure, they have simply claimed, contrary to all historical evidence, that simply reducing tax rates will generate enough economic activity to make up for the loss in revenue, Van Hollen said., In an earlier post-election comment Wednesday, Boehner said that by keeping Republicans in control of the House, voters had made clear there is no mandate for raising taxes. An added barrier to tax hikes is that many Republicans have taken a pledge not to vote for tax increases., That logjam has some Democrats, like Rep. Peter Welch of Vermont, arguing that the party should be willing to go over the fiscal cliff. That would put pressure on Republicans to make a deal by Jan. 1, or face the prospect of an automatic expiration of the tax cuts enacted under President George W. Bush., I think the Democrats have to take advantage of the fact that there is leverage here, Welch said., And Welch thinks even if no agreement is reached prior to Jan. 1 and lawmakers wind up going over the cliff, there's a good chance they'll come up with a more comprehensive plan for long-term deficit reduction early next year., And if we did, my view [is] that would be the best outcome for the economy and for the middle class, Welch said., He said one silver lining for Republicans is that there would be no need to vote for tax increases in this process. Taxes would rise automatically as the Bush tax cuts expired on Jan. 1. And the subsequent long-term deal would no doubt involve a tax cut as tax breaks for the middle class were reinstated., But Welch acknowledged that it's risky. In fact, the Congressional Budget Office has said going over the fiscal cliff could throw the U.S. economy back into recession and raise the unemployment rate. A sharp drop in the stock market Wednesday was attributed to jitters over the fiscal cliff.
Patty Manfredonia, president of a volunteer ambulance company in Sayville, N.Y., has been collecting blankets for Long Island residents without power. A new storm Wednesday is already causing new outages., Patty Manfredonia, president of a volunteer ambulance company in Sayville, N.Y., has been collecting blankets for Long Island residents without power. A new storm Wednesday is already causing new outages., Normally, the nor'easter bearing down on the Northeast on Wednesday wouldn't be a tremendous cause for concern. But the storm, delivering snow, sleet and wind gusts of up to 60 miles per hour, is expected to hit parts of Long Island and New Jersey still reeling from Hurricane Sandy., More than nine days after Sandy hit, more than 200,000 Long Island residents are still waiting for the power to come back on. The Long Island Power Authority, already facing intense criticism from residents and state officials, has issued warnings that Wednesday's storm is likely to create new outages., Sandy wreaked havoc on Long Island's power grid. Restoring power is going to be one of the major challenges for us, said New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo at a press conference last week. You have about 2 million families without power. Close to half of those families, he said, were Long Island residents., But Patty Manfredonia, president of a volunteer ambulance company in Sayville, N.Y., lucked out., I am the lucky one who never lost power, so people can hate me all they want, she says. I had friends showering and bathing here ... they were able to come here, charge up their phones and their computers. So that was one good thing., Nonstop Calls For Help, Initially, people pulled together in Sandy's wake. The Long Island Power Authority, or LIPA, posted an outage map online. Little blue dots illustrated each place power was down, and hard hats showed where crews were working. Blue dots covered the map., Manfredonia and her ambulance crew also saw an uptick in calls., We got a lot of respiratory [calls] during the hurricane, because people lost power and we had to take them to the hospitals to let them plug in or get oxygen, she says., Long Island Power Authority's outage map, as of 4 p.m. EST Wednesday. Blue indicates restored customers (in previous versions, blue represented areas without power)., Long Island Power Authority's outage map, as of 4 p.m. EST Wednesday. Blue indicates restored customers (in previous versions, blue represented areas without power)., And calls like those haven't really stopped. Sunday night, an elderly woman turned off her generator and shut down her respirator to try to save gas. When she went to bed that night, Manfredonia says, she was unable to lie in bed because she was having so much trouble breathing. Crew member Chris Gonzales got the call and ran her to the hospital., Patience Wanes, As of Monday, one week after Sandy hit, more than 300,000 people on Long Island still had no electricity and patience was fading., It's getting frustrating, you know, says Matt Shatzer, a doctor who lives in Dix Hills. His area was not particularly hard-hit by the storm, but earlier this week he and his family were camping out at his sister's place., I appreciate that my family and I are OK, and my house is intact. But it's definitely getting very frustrating that we are on a week now of not having power, Shatzer says., Long Island's power grid is almost entirely aboveground. The island is densely populated, but it's also heavily wooded, so when the wind blows hard like during a nor'easter power inevitably fails somewhere., Sheldon Sackstein, the chairman of a county oversight committee that monitors the power authority, says the time has come to start to underground this system., Crews work to restore power in Bethpage, N.Y., on Saturday. As of Wednesday, more than 200,000 Long Island residents were still without power, as a nor'easter made new outages likely., Crews work to restore power in Bethpage, N.Y., on Saturday. As of Wednesday, more than 200,000 Long Island residents were still without power, as a nor'easter made new outages likely., A Utility Company Under Fire, But LIPA officials say burying all the wires could cost $30 billion. To complicate matters, this week, Moody's warned that the power authority was already in danger of running out of cash., Cuomo has threatened to replace LIPA's management. Sackstein says he's been asking LIPA to show its emergency response manuals and plans for at least 18 months., So where do you point the finger? I'm not sure yet, he says, But I'd certainly like to read those emergency preparedness manuals., Manuals or no, Sackstein says it's obvious to him that LIPA wasn't prepared., By Tuesday, Shatzer, the Dix Hills doctor, was upset not only that his family still lacked power but also that LIPA had taken down the maps indicating where the power was still out., Turns out residents had noticed some big outages weren't represented on those maps, so LIPA then replaced it with one that offers a lot less detail., Officials at LIPA say they are doing the best they can. They are grappling with the biggest storm in their history, they say, and another that has already arrived.
Not just an empty suit., Hi! I'm back. I was once a banker and now I write for Dealbreaker and answer your questions about the financial world here. You can send questions to planetmoney@npr.org with ask a banker in the subject line, or ask on Twitter (@planetmoney). We've talked before about using financial tools to game the world a bit, and this week's question is in a related line:, Q. Do you think high frequency trading is truly helpful for an efficient market?, Oh, I don't know. Let's start way way way way way back., Why is there trading? Start with this: If you're a company, you sell stocks or bonds because you want money to do something. You've got a great idea to build a car or an iPhone app or a cure for cancer, and doing that requires building factories or hiring developers or running tests, and doing that requires money, and you've got the idea but not the money, so you go to the market a bunch of people who invest money for themselves or for other people and you ask for money and those investors give it to you., Why do they give it to you? Primarily because they like the idea: you convince them that you're actually going to sell cars or apps or cancer cures, and if you do you'll make a lot of money, and if that happens you'll be rolling in money and give them enough money to roll in too., But secondarily because they're in this thing called the market. Which means that they can sell the stocks or bonds that they bought for money. Let's focus on stocks for now. A share of stock is perpetual, meaning that if I bought stock from Facebook in its initial public offering this year, I paid Facebook $38, and they never have to pay me back. Some stocks pay dividends - they give you a bit of money every year for owning their stock - but many, including Facebook, don't, and have no plans to.* Basically I've given money to Facebook and that's it., What am I, an idiot? I mean, kind of? But in one or five or twenty or a million years Facebook will wind up its accounts and its shareholders will participate in some way. If Google buys Facebook for $40 a share, each shareholder will get $40. If Facebook starts paying dividends, each shareholder will get dividends. If Facebook goes bankrupt, each shareholder will get $0., What that means practically is that right now your share of Facebook is worth something not $38! but something! because people are making calculations about what it will be worth in the future, and taking into account the probabilities of it being worth zero or $40 or $1,000 or whatever at some point in the future, and the risks and delays before that happens, and adding that up in some way to get a value today. Which is $21.17, an oddly specific number for all that estimation and uncertainty., This is amazing.** This is in some sense what finance is; it's transforming the future into the present and the present into the future. Facebook will take over the world and make a zillion dollars, or it will fail and make zero dollars, or any number of intermediate outcomes, and you integrate across those possibilities and you get $21.17. $21.17! To the penny!, We'll talk about high frequency trading in a minute, but to understand the stakes you need to realize that this is magic. And it's magic because there's a system of trading that allows for at least pretty frequent trading. If you couldn't turn Facebook shares into money at some time between the time Facebook was founded and the time it winds up its business, you'd never invest in Facebook. And the more easily you can turn those shares into money, the more appealing it is for you to invest in new ideas., The thing that lets you quickly transform an investment into money is called liquidity. A share of Facebook stock is incredibly liquid: if it's trading at $21.17 now, I can sell it in 16.5 seconds for a price that will pretty predictably be between, say, $21.15 and $21.19. I may not want to do that, but it's nice to know I have the option. A house is less liquid; if Zillow tells me my house is worth $250,000, I can probably sell it within six months for a price between $175,000 and $300,000, or something., Sometimes you want investments, sometimes you want money, and the more easily you can transform the one into the other the happier you are. So liquidity is good, mostly., So: high frequency trading. High frequency trading is just a super-concentrated form of trading, done so quickly that it is impossible for humans to keep up so it's done by computers instead. High-frequency trading computers constantly submit bids to buy stocks (and offers to sell them). Their goal is to make a profit by immediately reselling a stock for slightly more than they bought it for. If trading provides liquidity, HFT provides super-liquidity., One reason for the discussion of liquidity above is to make you feel in your bones that liquidity is good and there's some presumption that more liquidity is more good. That presumption is rebuttable, but you need to rebut it. When people say things like stocks should be for financing companies and you should buy and hold them and not trade them like maniacs, you should be suspicious. How often can you trade? If the ability to trade once a year is good, is once a month better? Once a day? Once a minute? A second?, And yet!, Despite that bias in favor of liquidity, there are real problems with high frequency trading. Here are three big ones, and one thing to notice about them is that they are basically the problems with all trading, just speeded up., 1. High frequency traders are trying to trick people. A decent chunk of high frequency trading consists of submitting orders that aren't executed. Why does this happen? Essentially to fish out what's going on in the market. High frequency algorithms are designed to, among other things, ferret out whether there's a big order in the market., If some big, real money mutual fund Vanguard or Fidelity or whoever buys a million shares of Facebook, that pushes up the price of the stock. If a high-frequency trader figures out that this is happening, they can rush in, buy some Facebook stock, and immediately resell it to the mutual fund at a slightly higher price. This takes money out of the pockets of mutual funds, which tend to hold your retirement savings, and puts it into the pockets of high-frequency trading firms, which tend not to., But all traders are trying to trick each other. That is the skill of trading: your goal is to buy from people who undervalue a stock and sell to people who overvalue it. The algorithms just do it faster and more dispassionately than humans do, and probably spend as much of their time trying to trick other algorithms as they do trying to trick real money investors. And because the algorithms are competing to get business and information, they tend to offer to buy stocks at slightly higher prices and sell them at lower prices than other traders. This is good for ordinary investors., 2. High frequency trading is a waste of resources. It turns out that you can make a lot of money if you are a microsecond faster than the other guy, so you build super fast computers and hire super smart mathematicians all in the pursuit of shaving a few microseconds off the time it takes you to trade a stock. That is, like, a stupid thing for people to devote their energies to. Why not have all those physics Ph.D.s build spaceships to go to Mars or whatever?, But all trading is, in some sense, a stupid thing for people to devote their energies to. Just moving around stocks and money between people is a mostly-pointless activity in itself; if you buy my shares of Facebook stock no new investment happens, no new factories are built, no new diseases are cured. Each individual trade looks pointless from a social perspective. But the ability to buy and sell stocks efficiently makes it easier for new companies to raise money. The trades are mostly pointless, but the system of trading is valuable., Incidentally, most people think that we do spend too many resources on this whole trading business. There's a wonderful recent paper by Thomas Philippon of NYU, who points out that, while the income of the financial industry has grown from ~5% to ~8% of the American economy since 1980, the value it provides, in terms of liquidity services and financing of businesses, has not grown nearly as fast. As he puts it, the cost of financial intermediation has actually gone up since the 1970s, unlike most industries where increasing use of technology has lowered costs. High frequency trading may be a part of this, but it's unlikely to be the main part; it is a symptom of the excessive dedication of resources to trading, rather than a cause. 3. High frequency trading causes instability. This is the scariest of the three problems., It used to be that humans called specialists stood around at the New York Stock Exchange making bids and offers to buy and sell stocks. They had a cushy living and you paid them a lot to buy or sell stocks, but there they were, on the Stock Exchange, easy to find. When things got bad when stocks were plunging they had a hard time packing up and leaving., Now the New York Stock Exchange is mainly filled with CNBC correspondents; while the specialists are still around, their function has been largely displaced by computers that charge less for buying and selling stocks. One reason that they can charge less is that they're computers, but another is that, when times get bad, you can't find them. Sometimes they actually get turned off., When things look dicey and you want to sell your stocks, there's no one to buy them, since all the computers got turned off, so the prices plummet. Specialists made a nice living in exchange for taking the risk of keeping the market orderly when others freaked out; the computers make a slightly less nice living but don't take that risk., Also, the computers are idiots! If Facebook last traded at $21.17 and I tell my broker just sell as fast as you can, and he gets to the market and the best bid is $21.10, he'll reluctantly sell. But if the best bid is $0.01, and there's been no bad news about Facebook, he will probably wait a second and see what's up. Some computers will just sell at $0.01. This is an unimaginably dumb example but it actually happened to some stocks (not Facebook)., This, too, is in some ways just a symptom of all trading. One bad thing about liquidity is that it creates volatility: if you can buy and sell constantly, prices will move around a lot. If you can't, they won't.*** Much of the time these price movements are okay: they allow supply and demand to balance, and let everyone know how much things are worth and how much money should be devoted to them. But in extreme cases ,big moves in the prices of financial things, even if they're caused not by economic fundamentals but by stupid computers, can actually cause serious harm. Companies can be destroyed, jobs can be lost, real people can be affected by computers' stupidity., That's the main worry about high frequency trading: That, while it may marginally increase the efficiency of the liquidity machine that makes it easy to finance good ideas, it also increases the risk of catastrophe. Is that true, and if so, does the risk outweigh the benefit? Possibly, but it's hard to be sure. Probability of catastrophe is a hard thing to measure. Until, of course, the catastrophe happens., * Here is what Facebook has to say about the matter:, We have never declared or paid cash dividends on our capital stock. We currently intend to retain any future earnings for use in the operation of our business and do not intend to declare or pay any cash dividends in the foreseeable future. Any further determination to pay dividends on our capital stock will be at the discretion of our board of directors, subject to applicable laws, and will depend on our financial condition, results of operations, capital requirements, general business conditions, and other factors that our board of directors considers relevant. In addition, the terms of our credit facilities contain restrictions on our ability to pay dividends., ** Perhaps my favorite financial writer, Nassim Taleb, says that if there is a possible spot in time and space capable of bringing a profit, then the areas surrounding it need to account for that effect. That is the most important thing to understand about finance, probably, and the world, possibly., Incidentally that quote is from this book, which is great but quite technical; his more accessible books include The Black Swan and Fooled By Randomness, which you should read but which mostly live in the everyday world rather than a space-time-profit continuum. Pity., Also: this notion of prices today being based on expectations of future prices is very memorably explained in chapter 12, The State of Long-Term Expectation, of J.M. Keynes's General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. With a name like that it's gotta be boring but in fact the book is great and the chapter is among the high points of all economic, financial, or really any writing., *** Think of the 2007-2008 financial crisis: in the past, if house prices dropped, that wasn't a big problem, because what are you going to do, you already own your house, who really cares that it's worth less than it used to be? But with banks trading billions of dollars of mortgages whose value was closely tied to house prices, and with &lt;b&gt;people&lt;/b&gt; taking out billions of dollars of adjustable-rate mortgages that they could only afford to pay if house prices went up, houses stopped looking like, just, things you owned, and started looking like liquid things that trade in the market. And so their prices could bounce around, and those bounces could have negative effects on the real world.
On the floor of the New York Stock Exchange this morning., On the floor of the New York Stock Exchange this morning., On the day after voters returned President Obama to the White House and kept Democrats in control of the Senate and Republicans in control of the House:, Investors pulled back sharply ... [amid] rising worries about the upcoming fiscal fight in Congress, The Wall Street Journal writes., As Bloomberg News adds:, Now that the election has been decided, investors [are turning] their focus to the $607 billion of tax increases and federal spending cuts set to kick in automatically in January, the so-called fiscal cliff. The Congressional Budget Office has said the U.S. economy would slow by as much as 0.5 percent next year if Congress fails to keep the increases from taking effect., The result: Stocks are down more than 2 percent. The Dow Jones industrial average is off more than 280 points in late-morning trading. It's feared the White House and Congress won't be able to avert a plunge over that fiscal cliff., We'll keep an eye on the market and update this post later today., Update at 4 p.m. ET. A Down Day:, As trading comes to a close for the day, indices are now down a little more than 2 percent. The Dow Jones industrial average is off just over 300 points., Update at 1 p.m. ET. Still Down:, Stock indices remain down about 2 percent.
If Congress fails to address the alternative minimum tax, millions of households could see their federal 2012 tax bills jump., If Congress fails to address the alternative minimum tax, millions of households could see their federal 2012 tax bills jump., For months, Americans have been watching the presidential political drama play out nightly on the news. Now, with President Obama's victory, that story is ending., But for the economy, an action thriller is just beginning., Congress has just weeks to jump to the rescue of an economy moving closer and closer to the so-called fiscal cliff. That phrase refers to a $600 billion cluster of automatic spending cuts and tax hikes all coming together at year's end., Private economists, along with the Congressional Budget Office, warn that unless the lame-duck Congress takes action within weeks, the coming budget changes could push the economy over a metaphorical cliff and down into another recession., After Tuesday's election results became clear, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., said in a statement that lawmakers have big challenges facing us in the months ahead. He added that Democrats and Republicans must come together, and show that we are up to the challenge. This is no time for excuses. This is no time for putting things off until later., The consequences of inaction would be so grave that most economists believe lawmakers will find the hero in themselves and come together now that the election is over., Our mantra is: 'They really can't be that stupid,' Chris Varvares, president of Macroeconomic Advisers LLC, said on a conference call organized by the National Association for Business Economics., But Tuesday's election, with all of its harsh words and bitter feelings, may make it difficult for Congress to return for a few weeks of chummy compromise. The lame-duck session will have many members who are on the way out, having lost their re-election bids. Their bruising campaigns may have left them feeling ungenerous toward the opposing party., Still, they must try to get something done. The soon-to-expire Congress is set to convene Nov. 13. Very likely, comprehensive solutions to fiscal-cliff problems will have to wait for the new Congress in January. But because so many deadlines will be hit before then, the lawmakers will need to pass measures to cope with a number of other crises, and then stall for time on the edge of the cliff., For example, Superstorm Sandy may force lawmakers to take quick action to shore up the Federal Emergency Management Agency, also known as FEMA. The agency could get overwhelmed by the cost of helping people whose homes have been destroyed by flooding. And then there's the cost of rebuilding public transit systems., A large, bipartisan group of congressmen signed a letter this week, asking House leaders to prepare to spend more money for cleaning up after the storm. They wrote that as the full brunt of Hurricane Sandy is quantified, Congress must stand ready to provide the aid and assistance to the people and communities most devastated by this storm., And then there's the debt ceiling. Last week, the Treasury Department warned that the country probably will hit its $16.4 trillion borrowing limit by the end of the year. If the U.S. were to hit the ceiling and risk default on its debts, it could trigger a second downgrade of the U.S. government's credit rating and another rattling of global financial markets., Aside from FEMA and the debt ceiling, Congress must find ways to delay the fiscal-cliff cluster of changes. Take just this one: the alternative minimum tax the AMT, an obscure tax rule is about to sharply increase taxes for about 27 million households, according to the Congressional Research Service., Any couple with children and an annual income of more than $75,000 could be facing a federal tax bill that is thousands of dollars higher this year. Yes. Their taxes would shoot up for the 2012 tax year. Once the filing season begins in January, retroactive fixes to the AMT become much more difficult to implement, so Congress must act before New Year's Eve., When first created in 1969, the AMT was intended to ensure that wealthy people could not use deductions to escape paying all taxes. But the tax was not adjusted for inflation, and Congress has had to regularly apply a patch to ensure that the AMT didn't apply to average families. But because of political gridlock, Congress didn't pass a patch this year and now the deadline is looming., So, you've got FEMA, the debt ceiling and the AMT patch all demanding immediate action, even before turning to all of the other fiscal-cliff elements., Those include:, &mdash; the expiration of the George W. Bush-era tax cuts;, &mdash; the end of extended emergency unemployment benefits;, &mdash; the expiration of the Social Security payroll tax reduction; and, &mdash; the start of automatic sequestration spending cuts that hit hard at the Pentagon budget., Addressing all of the fiscal-cliff issues will be daunting. But at least for now, some business groups are trying to sound a hopeful note., There is much work ahead of us, Jay Timmons, president of the National Association of Manufacturers, said after Obama had won re-election. After all, it is time for our nation to heal and for Americans to come together.
Exit polls showed the economy was Issue No. 1 with voters in this presidential election. And it didn't take long for labor organizers and business leaders to start offering their thoughts on the re-election of President Obama., Because of White House policies, the U.S. economy is beginning to pick up steam, AFL-CIO President Richard Trumka said in a statement. He cheered Obama's win and put congressional Republicans on notice that Democrats will focus on ending the Bush tax cuts for the rich and opposing any cuts to Social Security, Medicare, or Medicaid benefits., The autoworkers union was particularly pleased about the defeat of Gov. Mitt Romney, who had opposed a government-sponsored auto-industry bailout., President Obama stood by American workers in their darkest hour, and UAW members and citizens in communities that are part of the thriving auto industry are grateful for his willingness to bet on us, UAW President Bob King said., Many business groups had supported Romney, but after the Republican candidate made his concession speech, they expressed a desire to try to work with the Obama administration., We'll work with the administration to double exports, on ways to strengthen our workforce and prepare Americans for jobs in modern manufacturing, Jay Timmons, president of the National Association of Manufacturers, said in a statement after Obama had won re-election.
The Environmental Protection Agency found Hyundai and its sister company, Kia, overstated the fuel economy ratings on about 900,000 cars., The Environmental Protection Agency found Hyundai and its sister company, Kia, overstated the fuel economy ratings on about 900,000 cars., If you bought a Hyundai or Kia over the past three years, you could soon be getting some money back from the two automakers., The Environmental Protection Agency says the South Korean carmakers, owned by the same parent company, overstated the gas mileage on 900,000 vehicles over the past three years. The EPA discovered the bloated figures during an audit of gas mileage tests undertaken by the companies. The agency said last week it was investigating how the carmakers arrived at the numbers., Here's more from The Associated Press:, The EPA found inflated gas mileage on 13 models from the 2011 through 2013 model years, including Hyundai's Elantra and Tucson, and Kia's Sportage and Rio. The window sticker mileages were overstated on about one-third of the cars sold by the companies during the three years., As a result, Hyundai and Kia will have to knock one or two miles per gallon off the vehicle stickers of most of their models. Some models will lose three or four miles per gallon. The Kia Soul, a funky-looking boxy small SUV, will lose six from its highway figure, lowering it from 34 mpg to 28 mpg., The EPA is looking into the errors; the AP reported the agency wouldn't comment on whether the companies will be fined or if a criminal investigation is under way., Automakers typically put their vehicles though an EPA-mandated test and submit the data to the government. The result is the number you see when you go out to buy a car. But, says Jerry Hirsch, who covers the automotive industry for the Los Angeles Times, the EPA conducted its own testing after several complaints about the Hyundai Elantra., The EPA got enough complaints where it decided, 'Let's test this car again,' he tells Melissa Block, host of NPR's All Things Considered. It tested the car and found out that its results were different than the results tested by Hyundai. So then they said, 'Wow! This is unusual.' And they went back and tested a whole bunch of cars that are produced by both Hyundai and Kia., In a statement on Kia's website, the company apologized for the rating and said both it and Hyundai are voluntarily adjusting the fuel economy ratings for approximately 900,000, or 35 percent of, 2011-2013 model year vehicles sold through October 31, 2012., The statement blamed the inflated estimates on procedural errors at the automakers' joint testing operations in Korea., Here's more from the statement:, Both companies are putting in place a comprehensive reimbursement program for affected current and former vehicle owners to cover the additional fuel costs associated with the fuel economy rating change. Customers will receive a personalized debit card that will reimburse them for their difference in the EPA combined fuel economy rating, based on the fuel price in their area and their own actual miles driven. In addition, as an acknowledgment of the inconvenience this may cause, we will add an extra 15 percent to the reimbursement amount., The LA Times' Hirsch tells NPR's Block that it's likely to cost the companies $50 million to $60 million. Ultimately, though, he says it's unlikely to have a long-term impact., This is a black eye for the companies and they've really oriented their advertising and marketing to fuel economy, but you also have to put this in perspective, he says. This is a pocketbook issue. It's not a safety defect. No one's getting killed. No one's getting hurt. There's no risk to drivers. And I think this is a bruise that will heal pretty quickly., The controversy did, however, worry investors, who dumped shares in the companies. Bloomberg reported that in trading in Seoul Monday, Hyundai and Kia lost a combined $4.7 billion in market value. Hyundai, South Korea's No. 1 carmaker, fell 7.2 percent. Kia, No. 2, lost 6.9 percent.
In New York, it takes an average of about three years for a bank to foreclose on a house., In Texas, it takes about three months., That's a huge, huge difference, and it's largely by design. About half the states in the country, including New York, require foreclosures to go through the courts. This slows down the process, and is intended to reduce the risk of someone being wrongly foreclosed on. In the other half of the country, including Texas, a third-party trustee can foreclose without going through the courts., The latest foreclosure numbers show a vastly different picture in judicial and non-judicial foreclosure states. Non-judicial states, including California and Arizona, raced through foreclosures in the first part of the housing bust and are now seeing foreclosures decline. Judicial states, including Florida, have had a slower process and are still seeing foreclosures rise., As we've noted before, foreclosed houses tend to sell for significantly less than similar houses that haven't been foreclosed on. And the massive wave of foreclosures that followed the housing bust has been a drag on home prices for years now., Overall, foreclosures in non-judicial states fell by 29 percent between July and September of this year, compared with the same period last year, according to RealtyTrac, a private company that focuses on foreclosures. Foreclosures in judicial states rose by 14 percent., This isn't true for every state some non-judicial foreclosure states are seeing rising foreclosure rates, and vice versa. But according to Darren Blomquist, a VP at RealtyTrac, the tradeoff is clear. A longer foreclosure process is prolonging the pain and the path to recovery for distressed properties, he says.
This aerial photo shows destruction in the wake of Superstorm Sandy on Wednesday in Seaside Heights, N.J., This aerial photo shows destruction in the wake of Superstorm Sandy on Wednesday in Seaside Heights, N.J., Superstorm Sandy capped what's been a pretty impressive couple of years for U.S. natural disasters. There have been wildfires, tornadoes, floods and derechos. And insurance companies are on the hook to pay billions in related claims., We're seeing more of everything, and what we're doing is trying to factor that in going forward as we work with others to have a better sense of what the future holds, says State Farm spokesman David Beigie., Here is one thing the industry agrees is true: The cost from hurricane damages is increasing. That's largely because population density and the cost of coastal property increases every year., Do insurers expect to see more frequent and more intense weather events in coming years? Opinions diverge., Peter Hoppe heads the Geo Risks Research center for Munich Re, a global company that insures other insurers. His company put out a report just before Sandy warning that North America will face a rising number of natural catastrophes due in part to greenhouse gas emissions., We believe that climate change is a big problem and will drive losses in the future, Hoppe says., He says there is no evidence climate change caused Hurricane Sandy. But, he says, it doesn't matter whether insurers believe in man-made climate change. His report says the number of weather-related events nearly quintupled in North America over the past three decades. And that means premiums will increase in the long run if exposure continues to increase., On the long term, definitely we have an interest in what will be happening in 50 years, or even in 100 years because this concerns our business model in general. It may be that in the long term, things become uninsurable, Hoppe says., But this is not a view embraced by the whole industry., Are we really seeing more storms, or are we just recording more storms? That's the big question, says longtime expert Karen Clark, who runs her own risk-management consultancy., Clark says the problem is that hurricane prediction is a very young science. She notes that records documenting hurricanes go back only about a century, a data set far too small to draw big conclusions., She says after Hurricane Katrina the most expensive of all documented storms some predicted a warming cycle would produce more powerful storms. That forecast did not bear out., It just shows you that we just are not that smart, you know, when it comes to what's really going on, Clark says., Bill Keogh, president of Eqecat, one of the major risk-modeling firms in the U.S., says that despite what it may seem, we are now in a statistically low period of hurricane activity. After Katrina, few powerful hurricanes have made landfall in the U.S., That is not to say Sandy won't change the way insurance companies assess their weather risks., Risk models change all the time, and they change when we have new information, Keogh says., That's especially true when that information is unusual. And Sandy was unusual because it hit the Northeast, as few hurricanes do, and because it veered inland, instead of toward the ocean. That information from Sandy, Keogh says, will shape views about the probability of future risks. But probability is not the same as a crystal-ball prediction., Everybody wants to know: 'Tell me the answer. You know, over the next five years, how many hurricanes will we have, what will they look like, how will much they cost. And when will the occur?' We don't do that, Keogh says., The only thing we can do, insurers say, is build our buildings safer, and better prepare for what will eventually come.
Job applicants meet potential employers at the NYC Startup Job Fair in September. Last month, the private sector created jobs while the public sector resumed laying off workers., Job applicants meet potential employers at the NYC Startup Job Fair in September. Last month, the private sector created jobs while the public sector resumed laying off workers., The last unemployment report before the election came out Friday, and the news was middling: Unemployment ticked up to 7.9 percent., The private sector created more than 180,000 new jobs, but state and local governments resumed laying workers off. That discrepancy is part of a longer-term trend., For a few years now, private sector employment has been growing, but since mid-2010, state and local governments have eliminated roughly half a million jobs., There's real consequences to these huge cuts in the public sector, for overall growth in the economy and for public services that we all need, says Sylvia Allegretto, labor market economist at the University of California, Berkeley., She says close to 40 percent of all the public-sector jobs losses have come in California., Class sizes are increasing because we laid off a ton of school K-12 teachers, she says. Our police department, which we've had to lay off a lot of those officers, is struggling., Distributing Stimulus, But to really tell the story of these two labor markets, you have to go back four years, to the beginning of the financial crisis. In early November 2008, Barack Obama had just been elected president., The economy was in turmoil, and the October job report had just come out: 240,000 jobs had been cut and the unemployment rate hit a 14-year high of 6.5 percent., Those numbers were horrible, but they actually understated the real scale of the crisis., Even before he was elected, Obama was pushing for a stimulus bill that was supported by a broad coalition of groups., But by the time that stimulus bill was passed and signed into law in February 2009, more than 2.2 million more jobs had disappeared. The bill's effect on private-sector employment has been debated ever since., The next year, however, the number of government-sector jobs remained relatively stable., We didn't start losing these jobs immediately, Allegretto says., She says there is often a lag in a downturn before governments start laying people off: It takes time for the government to institute their austerity measures., But there was another factor, too. Even though many state and local budgets were decimated, the stimulus bill offered those governments more than $53 billion in aid. That cash prevented hundreds of thousand of layoffs, at least for a while., Lagging Public Sector Losses, By 2010, the private labor market had begun to show signs of life. At the same time, stimulus aid to state government had begun run out., The large losses in the government sector actually started occurring once the recovery was underway, Allegretto says., And the political climate had changed. The newly elected Republican House had no appetite for another stimulus. Without more federal aid, local governments started to lay off workers., Allegretto believes those layoffs created another powerful drag on the economy, but most economists on the right don't share that view., You can have a fiscal expenditure to try to hire workers or keep workers in their jobs, but someone has to pay for that. That doesn't come for free, says University of Chicago professor Randall Kroszner, who served on President George W. Bush's Council of Economic Advisers., It's very important for sustainable, overall economic growth to be creating private-sector jobs, he says. The government perhaps can provide a stopgap, but that's very, very temporary at best., Instead, he prefers to see the federal government hold the line on new spending and then do everything it can to help the economy grow up around it.
Workers clean up debris left by Superstorm Sandy in Long Beach Island, N.J., on Wednesday. The storm may lead to layoffs as business losses mount, but also could result in hiring related to rebuilding., Workers clean up debris left by Superstorm Sandy in Long Beach Island, N.J., on Wednesday. The storm may lead to layoffs as business losses mount, but also could result in hiring related to rebuilding., Each month, the Labor Department issues an employment report. On Friday, that report showed job creation rose in October and it revealed something more., With its latest unemployment assessment, the government in effect took a BEFORE snapshot of the U.S. economy. It collected all of the data before Superstorm Sandy slammed into the East Coast and before the election outcome could be known. Each of those two events has the potential to change the AFTER outlook., The October report showed employers added 171,000 jobs more than the 125,000 that most economists had been predicting. And both August and September had upward revisions, suggesting job growth has been stronger lately than previously thought., The October jobless rate did increase a 10th of a point to 7.9 percent. But the uptick generally was interpreted as good news because it reflected a surge of applicants entering the labor market. Having 578,000 more people in the hunt for a job suggests optimism is rising., November 2, 2012, Still, last month's report had plenty of bad news, too. Some 12.3 million people are still looking for paychecks, and wages remain essentially flat. The economy would have to be generating roughly 350,000 jobs a month to get the unemployment rate back down under 6 percent within three years., A Mixed Snapshot, So, most economists saw this BEFORE snapshot as mixed. It revealed a still-cloudy job market, but one with some bright rays, especially in the retail, construction, hospitality and health care industries., After studying the statistics, one can have very different readings of the temperature of the recovery, Sharon Poczter, an economics professor at Cornell University, concluded in a written analysis., Those who believe the job market is heating up had no trouble finding evidence to support their optimism. Nigel Gault, chief U.S. economist for IHS Global Insight, a forecasting firm, saw a brighter picture in the numbers., There was good news in both construction and retail employment, consistent with the better news coming in from the housing market and with an improving consumer mood, Gault said in his analysis., But former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney, who is challenging President Obama for the White House, said the job market, filled with part-time workers and millions of long-term unemployed, remains much too weak., At a rally in Wisconsin, Romney said unemployment is higher today than when Barack Obama took office. Obama took office on Jan. 20, 2009. The unemployment rate was 7.8 percent that January, but it shot to 8.3 percent in February the first full month following the Bush administration., What About November?, Whatever the job market reality was this past month, it may well be different in November, both because of Superstorm Sandy and because of the election results., First, Sandy is having a huge impact on the East Coast, where physical damage is extensive and business-activity losses are mounting. Millions of people who work in restaurants, factories and offices are sitting at home, unable to work because of power outages and transportation breakdowns. Financial losses for their employers might lead to layoffs in coming weeks., Economists generally are putting the total losses at somewhere around $50 billion., But on the other hand, those losses likely will lead to job creation in November and December in the construction industry and elsewhere. Builders may go on a hiring binge to help families scrambling to fix and rebuild homes before Christmas. Companies that make building materials, such as roofing and lumber, may have to add employees., Tuesday's election results also could have an impact on jobs. Economists are unanimous in saying job growth is being slowed by the uncertainty surrounding the fiscal cliff an elaborate cluster of tax-and-spending changes coming at year's end., Uncertainty harms the economy by reducing consumers' level of spending on goods and services and lowering levels of investment and hiring by firms, says John Makin, an economist with the American Enterprise Institute., If Congress and the White House were to make progress in November and December toward removing that uncertainty, job creation could accelerate in coming months., Household and payroll survey employment, seasonally adjusted, 1994-2012. Blue bars indicate recessions., Household and payroll survey employment, seasonally adjusted, 1994-2012. Blue bars indicate recessions.
A tree service worker prepares to remove a giant oak tree limb that fell onto the roof of Charles Edamala's home in Elkins Park, Pa., during Superstorm Sandy., A tree service worker prepares to remove a giant oak tree limb that fell onto the roof of Charles Edamala's home in Elkins Park, Pa., during Superstorm Sandy., Mario Veas spent Monday night hunkered down with his family. But he has been running ever since., Veas runs a tree service in Willow Grove, Pa. He says his phone has been ringing nonstop because people want trees felled by the storm chopped up and cleared., Everybody [is] calling and they want [the job] to be done this morning, Veas says., Eqecat Inc. estimates $10 billion to $20 billion in insured losses from Superstorm Sandy. The company, which provides catastrophic risk models, says total economic damage could be as high as $50 billion., If you need to file a claim, the Insurance Information Institute has a variety of resources on its website, including:, &mdash; a guide to settling insurance claims after a disaster,, &mdash; an insurance coverage FAQ, and, - a list of claims-filing phone numbers for several insurance companies., And the National Flood Insurance Program's website has information about buying flood insurance., &mdash; Christopher Connelly, Earlier this week, Veas was clearing an enormous tree branch from Preethy Edamala's patio in nearby Elkins Park., It pretty much just landed on our roof and tipped over, Edamala says. It came down about three hours after our power went out., The roof held, and the day after the storm, her husband, Charles, was taking pictures and trying to get through to his insurance company., They've been backed up; the insurance people have been backed up, he says. I was on hold for about an hour and a half and couldn't get through to anyone., As the price tag for Sandy continues to climb some are estimating the total cost of the superstorm could run as high as $50 billion homeowners and business owners in the Northeast are not just dealing with the damage from the storm; they're also dealing with insurance companies., So far the Edamalas are doing everything right, according to Jeanne Salvatore at the Insurance Information Institute., If anybody does have damage, what they should do right now is get in touch with their insurance company and start taking steps to substantiate that loss, Salvatore says., But filing a claim might be the easy part. Actually getting paid could prove to be more difficult., Robert Hunter tracks the insurance industry for the Consumer Federation of America. In recent years, he says, many insurance companies have added so-called hurricane deductibles to their homeowners policies, based on the home's value., If you have a $400,000 insured house your deductible, if it's 5 percent, would be $20,000, Hunter says., But these higher deductibles apply only in hurricanes., In the past two days the governors of New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and Connecticut have all said hurricane deductibles shouldn't apply in this case because Sandy wasn't officially a hurricane when it came ashore, but Hunter expects this issue will end up in court., And for homes and businesses damaged by flooding, it doesn't matter whether Sandy was a hurricane or not., Since Sandy was a big, big flood event, you need to have purchased flood insurance, Salvatore says., She says conventional homeowners policies don't cover floods. Banks are supposed to require homeowners to buy federally backed flood insurance if they live in flood-prone areas, but Hunter says that doesn't always happen., So a lot of people who are supposed to have it don't, he says., Only about 20 percent of Americans actually have flood coverage. And if you don't have it and your home is flooded, you're out of luck., The second problem, which is more serious, is that a lot of companies have added into the policy something called the anti-concurrent causation clause, Hunter says., How's that for a bit of insurance jargon?, The basic idea, Hunter says, is that if you have two events happen at the same time, one that is covered and the other that is not covered by the policy, the insurance company doesn't have to pay for either. So if your house has damage from wind, which is covered by your policy, and it also has damage from a flood, which is not covered, the insurance company doesn't have to pay for either the wind or flood damage., After previous disasters, the anti-concurrent causation clause was challenged in the courts. But Hunter says there are no nationally binding precedents about whether clauses like this are valid., Hunter says for some in Sandy's path, it may take some time before they find out whether they are covered by their insurance or not.
How many signs like this were there in October? We got a clue today., How many signs like this were there in October? We got a clue today., The nation's unemployment rate edged up to 7.9 percent in October from 7.8 percent in September, the Bureau of Labor Statistics says., But private and public employers added 171,000 jobs to their payrolls nearly 50,000 more than economists had expected., So the news is somewhat mixed: While the jobless rate remained stuck near 8 percent, job growth was better than forecast., We'll have more from the report and reactions to it as the morning continues. Hit your refresh button to be sure you're seeing our latest updates. Or, click these links for:, &mdash; President Obama's reaction., &mdash; Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney's reaction., &mdash; Why the jobless rate went up even as more jobs were added to payrolls., Update at 11:35 a.m. ET. Romney Focuses On Obama's Record:, At 7.9 percent, the jobless rate is more than 2 points higher than President Obama said it would be by this time in his administration, Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney just told supporters in Wisconsin. The difference equals 9 million fewer jobs than Obama had predicted, according to Romney. He has also echoed comments he made earlier about the economy not getting on track during Obama's time in office., Update at 10:55 a.m. ET. Obama Hails Growth, But Says We've Got More Work To Do:, At a campaign rally in Ohio, President Obama just pointed to some of the good news in the report, including the word that private employers added more workers in October [184,000] than at any time in the last eight months. In February, private payrolls rose by 254,000 jobs., We've made real progress, but we are here today because we know we have more work to do, Obama added., Earlier, Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney said that today's increase in the unemployment rate is a sad reminder that the economy is at a virtual standstill., , Update at 9:40 a.m. ET. Economy Is Continuing To Heal, White House Says:, While more work remains to be done, today's employment report provides further evidence that the U.S. economy is continuing to heal from the wounds inflicted by the worst downturn since the Great Depression, Alan Krueger, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, says in a statement just released by the White House., He also points to this:, Over the last 12 months, the economy has added a total of 2.1 million jobs, as compared to 1.9 million over the preceding 12 months., Update at 9:30 a.m. ET. More On The Differences Between The Surveys:, As we said earlier, BLS really does two reports. One is based on a survey of employers (it concluded that 171,000 jobs were added to payrolls) and one is based on a survey of households (it concluded that the jobless rate rose to 7.9 percent). John Galvin, the acting commissioner at BLS, says in a statement that:, The household survey and establishment survey employment measures often show different month-to-month changes. The establishment survey employment series has a smaller margin of error than the household survey because of its much larger sample size. An over-the-month employment change of about 100,000 is statistically significant in the establishment survey, while the threshold for a statistically significant change in the household survey is about 400,000. However, the household survey has a more expansive scope than the establishment survey because it includes the self-employed, agricultural workers, and other workers who are excluded by the establishment survey. Over longer periods of time, the employment measures from the two surveys tend to track more closely., Update at 9:15 a.m. ET. Romney Says Economy Is At A Virtual Standstill:, Today's increase in the unemployment rate is a sad reminder that the economy is at a virtual standstill, Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney says in a statement just released by his campaign. The jobless rate is higher than it was when President Obama took office, and there are still 23 million Americans struggling for work., In the year before President Obama took office, the jobless rate rose from 5 percent in January 2008 to 7.8 percent in January 2009. The rate then continued upward, to a recent peak of 10 percent in October 2009. It didn't drop back below 8 percent until this September., Planet Money has charted the 22 million Americans who are unemployed or can't find full-time work., Update at 9:10 a.m. ET. Another Way Of Looking At Why The Jobless Rate Went Up:, &mdash; 578,000 people reported they had joined the labor force, either by finding work or just by looking for a job., &mdash; 410,000 people said they had found employment., &mdash; So, the ranks of the unemployed grew by about 170,000., Reminder: BLS is really reporting on two surveys: One of households and one of employers. Two surveys mean two sets of results that sometimes seem to say different things. In this case, though, both surveys are showing job growth in October., Update at 9 a.m. ET. Households Report Even Stronger Job Growth:, Though public and private employers said they added 171,000 jobs to their payrolls, the BLS says its survey of households indicates that 410,000 more Americans report they were working in October. That follows an increase of 873,000 in that figure from August to September., As we explained last month, the agency's two surveys one of employers and the other of households can produce different results., Update at 8:55 a.m. ET. First Republican Reaction:, Four years of persistently high unemployment and long-term joblessness might be the best President Obama can do but it's nowhere near what the American people can do if we get Washington out of their way, House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) says in a statement just released by his office., Update at 8:45 a.m. ET. Why Did The Jobless Rate Go Up? , When job growth is stronger than forecast but the unemployment rate still rises, economists look at whether more people joined the labor force hopefully because many of them are optimistic about being able to find work., According to BLS, the civilian labor force rose by 578,000 to 155.6 million in October, and the labor force participation rate edged up to 63.8 percent [from 63.6 percent]. Meanwhile, there were 813,000 discouraged workers in October, a decline of 154,000 from a year earlier. Discouraged workers are those folks who aren't looking for work because they believe no jobs are available for them., Those figures may signal that the jobless rate stayed near 8 percent in part because of good news that more Americans are feeling better about the economy and have decided to start looking for work. That increased the size of the labor force, though, and helped lift the jobless rate a tenth of a point., Update at 8:40 a.m. ET. September Job Growth Revised Up:, There were 148,000 jobs added to payrolls in September, BLS now says. That's up from the agency's initial estimate of 114,000., Our original post (from 7 a.m. ET). Jobless Rate Likely Edged Up In October, Job Growth Was Likely Modest:, The last major economic report before Election Day is due at 8:30 a.m. ET and economists say we should expect to hear that the unemployment rate ticked up to 7.9 percent in October from September's estimated 7.8 percent and that payrolls grew by just 125,000 jobs., Whatever the Bureau of Labor Statistics says, the news is sure to be a hot topic on the campaign trail and among political pundits. As you've surely heard many times:, &mdash; Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney says President Obama's economic policies haven't done enough to spur job growth and bring down unemployment., &mdash; The president has been touting the slow job growth and gradual decline in unemployment since the jobless rate's recent peak of 10 percent in October 2009. He says they're signs the economy is on the right track., They're likely to hit those themes again today., Meanwhile, some skeptics such as former General Electric CEO Jack Welch will be watching closely to see if the BLS report fits with their view of how the economy is doing., We'll update this post with the news after the report is released, and follow with highlights and reactions. Also check Planet Money for economic analysis and It's All Politics for more on how the report might affect the campaign.
Fawzy Abdelwahid, the owner of B&H; Restaurant in the East Village, said he had to throw out $4,000 of food spoiling in his refrigerator. His is one of many small businesses impacted by power outages in Manhattan., Fawzy Abdelwahid, the owner of B&H; Restaurant in the East Village, said he had to throw out $4,000 of food spoiling in his refrigerator. His is one of many small businesses impacted by power outages in Manhattan., Lower Manhattan continues to slog through another day without electricity, and it's taking a toll on businesses that have been shuttered since the storm hit. No electricity means no lights, no credit card machines, no heating and no refrigerators to keep food fresh, so local shops and restaurants are waiting desperately for the power to turn back on., There's about $4,000 worth of garbage outside B&H; Restaurant in the East Village. Twenty trash bags are piled in a small mountain on the sidewalk. Fawzy Abdelwahid, the owner, has just spent the last eight hours cleaning and dumping out what's spoiling in his lifeless kitchen soups, cheeses, fish, vegetables, lasagna, milk, eggs and tuna salad., The power vanished Monday night, and Abdelwahid estimates he's losing about $2,000 every day he has been closed. He says he has only $5,000 in savings for himself, his wife and child. And it's the beginning of the month now bills are due. So Abdelwahid says he's probably going to be calling his mother in Egypt to borrow money., Sandy cost Joshua Suzanne her most profitable time of the year Halloween week. She owns Rags-A-GoGo, a vintage store, in the West Village., Sandy cost Joshua Suzanne her most profitable time of the year Halloween week. She owns Rags-A-GoGo, a vintage store, in the West Village., I cannot afford more than a week, he says. More than a week, it's going to be too much. Because this is my only job., Even if B&H; started serving a limited menu, like some other restaurants nearby, where would the customers be? Many people from the neighborhood who are sick of living without electricity or hot water have left., Socks Get No Foot Traffic, Jeff Johnson has been staring at the trickle of foot traffic all afternoon. He's trying to resuscitate The Sock Man, a shop in the East Village. He had asked his boss for permission to set up a table full of socks outside the store to reel in shoppers, since the darkened store behind him wasn't enticing too many people., You gotta try it! You gotta see what happens, you know? Because you're tired of being home, Johnson says., But by the end of the afternoon, he had sold only three pairs of socks., The few people sauntering down the street right now aren't looking to retail shop; they're out for water, nonperishable food or just a place to recharge their phones., This has all been really bad timing for Joshua Suzanne, who owns a vintage store called Rags-A-GoGo in the West Village., I'll be very honest with you. When I closed my store on Saturday, I did over three grand that day, and that was just the beginning of what was about to be the Halloween extravaganza, Suzanne says. I really mean it anybody that does anything that is colorful, bright and costume-y kicks at this time., Paul Nicaj, who owns Battery Gardens Restaurant on the southern tip of Manhattan, says Superstorm Sandy will cost him a few hundred thousand dollars, including income from two weddings that may have to be cancelled this weekend., Paul Nicaj, who owns Battery Gardens Restaurant on the southern tip of Manhattan, says Superstorm Sandy will cost him a few hundred thousand dollars, including income from two weddings that may have to be cancelled this weekend., Suzanne says Halloween is her Christmas season, but Sandy stole it away. She says she needed the money from this week to keep her in business during January and February, when things get slow., Warped Floor And Broken Toe, Other businesses are taking an even bigger hit, such as Battery Gardens Restaurant. It's perched on the southern tip of Manhattan, which was under 12 feet of water during the storm's peak. Two feet of seawater seeped into the dining room., If two weddings don't go on this weekend as planned, the owner says, he will be out $80,000., The wooden dance floor is now warped and buckling after being submerged for a day. The kitchen still reeks of floodwater mixed with gallons of grease that spilled during the storm., But owner Paul Nicaj says as soon as Con Ed powers back up, he's ready to open thanks to a few employees who walked to work the day after the storm to help clean up all the debris scattered in and around the restaurant., Many employees had traveled from the Bronx that day, including someone who walked all the way down from 240th Street a 15-mile walk., About 80 more employees are still waiting to come back to work., Nicaj stayed planted in his restaurant all night during the storm, even though the city had ordered him to leave. He says he ran around like a maniac sandbagging the perimeter. A marble table fell on his foot and broke his toe. , It's OK. When you break a toe you can do nothing. Just tape it and go on with it. Wear a little wider shoe, he says with a shrug., The toe is the least of his worries now. He's popping painkillers every four hours and just beginning to assess the damage and lost business. By the time all the repairs are done, Nicaj thinks he'll be out a few hundred thousand dollars.
Black Friday 2011 in Manhattan. Will consumers come out in force this holiday season? Their confidence was high in October., Black Friday 2011 in Manhattan. Will consumers come out in force this holiday season? Their confidence was high in October., By at least one measure, in October consumers were the most confident they've been since February 2008, the private Conference Board reports., Its widely watched consumer confidence index rose to 72.2 from 68.4 in September. According to a statement from the board's director of economic indicators, Lynn Franco, consumers were considerably more positive in their assessment of current conditions, with improvements in the job market as the major driver. Consumers were modestly more upbeat about their financial situation and the short-term economic outlook, and appear to be in better spirits approaching the holiday season., Since consumers purchase about 70 percent of all goods and services, their mood is a key economic indicator., This news follows the morning's other major economic indicators, which included word that private payrolls may have increased last month by about 158,000 jobs.
Job seekers were on line at a career fair in Manhattan back in August., Job seekers were on line at a career fair in Manhattan back in August., Three closely watched employment indicators are out this morning:, &mdash; Unemployment Benefits. There were 363,000 first-time claims for jobless benefits last week, down from 372,000 the week before, the Employment and Training Administration says. So, as they have all year, claims remain in a range between 350,000 and 400,000., &mdash; Job Growth. Private sector employment increased by 158,000 jobs from September to October, according to the latest ADP National Employment Report. That follows a gain of 114,000 from August to September, according to the private management consultants., &mdash; Layoff Plans. Planned job cuts by U.S.-based employers surged 41 percent in October to 47,724, as a spate of layoff announcements in the wake of weak quarterly earnings reports helped push downsizing activity to its highest level in five months, outplacement consultants Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas, Inc. say., So we have some mixed signals., Things may get clearer, of course, on Friday when the Bureau of Labor Statistics reports the October unemployment rate and its estimate of how many jobs were added to public and private payrolls. A month ago, it said the jobless rate was 7.8 percent in September and that payrolls rose by 114,000 that month., According to Reuters, economists it has surveyed expect BLS will say there were 125,000 jobs added to payrolls and that the jobless rate edged up to 7.9 percent in October.
Sandbags protect an entrance of the New York Stock Exchange, Monday, Oct. 29, 2012., Note: This story was originally published on Oct. 30. It was updated on Nov. 1 to include a radio version of the story., The stock market, according to a popular narrative, is now just computers making superfast trades with other computers. Those pictures of traders getting emotional on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange are an anachronism. The real action flashes through fiber-optic cables headed for servers in places like Kansas City. It's algorithms all the way down., In keeping with this theme, as the storm approached Sunday night, the New York Stock Exchange decided to close its trading floor Monday but to keep the market open as a purely electronic exchange., This decision caused a revolt, Reuters reports. The revolt came from financial firms that:, did not want their employees to have to report to work in the midst of the worst storm to hit New York City since at least 1938, a storm that was forecast to bring flooding, punishing winds and widespread power outages., It was, 'Please don't do this. The market is not ready', one of the sources said., So the NYSE, in conjunction with NASDAQ and other all-electronic exchanges, reversed itself and decided to shut down entirely Monday. The market remains closed today, and is likely to re-open Wednesday., There is a lot of truth to the narrative about computers taking over the market. Most trades do indeed occur on all-electronic exchanges. Computers do indeed make superfast trades with other computers., But the NYSE still plays a critical role by holding auctions at the beginning and end of the trading day to determine the opening and closing prices of major stocks, the WSJ notes. They are testing out a way to do this electronically, but for now, it's done by those guys on the trading floor you see in the pictures., U.S. bond trading also stopped early on Monday, and has yet to resume. An industry group that represents trading firms and banks called for the shutdown. Bonds don't get as much coverage as stocks in the popular press, but they play an even bigger role than stocks for financial firms., All this is a useful reminder that Wall Street is not just a metaphor. It's an actual street that sits at the center of a financial district where tens of thousands of people go to work every day. For now, anyway, if those people can't get to work, the financial system can't function.
Federal regulators have announced the results of a September inspection blitz targeting 13 coal mines in seven states previously cited for violations regarding respirable dust sampling ... inadequate dust control ... and hazard complaints involving excessive coal dust., More than 120 new violations were found, including failures to maintain adequate ventilation and water-spraying equipment underground, which work together to suppress coal dust and minimize its inhalation by coal miners., Inadequate ventilation, insufficient air quantities and improperly maintained dust controls expose miners to risk of explosions and black lung, says Joe Main, assistant secretary of labor for mine safety and health., Excessive coal dust was cited as a major cause of the massive explosion that ripped through the Upper Big Branch coal mine in West Virginia in 2010, killing 29 coal miners., Failure to control coal dust is also cited as the source of black lung, a deadly disease that strikes coal miners., The September impact inspection followed reporting in July by NPR, the Center for Public Integrity and The Charleston Gazette, which found a dramatic increase in black lung cases in Appalachia and widespread failures in the system that's supposed to detect and control coal dust exposures. But the Mine Safety and Health Administration insists that the NPR, CPI and Gazette reports did not prompt the coal dust inspections., MSHA has had a special inspection program focused on coal dust for several years, notes agency spokeswoman Amy Louviere. But monthly impact inspections began after the Upper Big Branch tragedy in 2010; the September blitz was the first to specifically target mines with persistent coal dust control problems., Due to the egregious nature of some of the recent dust-related violations our inspectors have been finding, Louviere says, [Main] decided it was important to give special consideration to these compliance issues., One of the coal mines singled out by MSHA inspectors was once owned by Massey Energy, the company that owned the Upper Big Branch mine. The Roundbottom Powellton Mine in Boone County, W.Va., is now owned by Alpha Natural Resources but is still managed by a former Massey official who supervised some of Massey's most troubled mines., MSHA inspectors found 21 violations at Roundbottom Powellton, including improperly ventilated areas and dysfunctional water sprays that help control coal dust. Citations were also issued for excessive accumulations of coal dust., Two other mines cited are owned by Robert Murray, the controversial owner of Murray Energy. Murray's Crandall Canyon coal mine in Utah experienced two collapses in 2007, killing nine miners and rescuers., Murray, a persistent critic of government regulation, has been prominent in the presidential campaign of Republican Mitt Romney., In August, he hosted a rally for Romney at one of his Ohio coal mines, which is not one of the mines cited recently by MSHA., You've got a great boss. He runs a great operation here, Romney told Murray employees, some of whom later complained that they were required to attend the event., The rally appearance is now the subject of dueling Romney and President Obama campaign ads broadcast heavily in Ohio, a critical battleground state. Both Murray and Romney have accused the Obama administration of waging a war on coal with its regulation of coal mines and coal-fired powered plants., Murray's New Future Mine in Illinois received eight citations for respirable dust issues. Five are considered serious and substantial. His West Ridge mine in Utah was cited for six violations. Inspectors also issued four withdrawal orders requiring immediate evacuation of specific areas of the mine., Coal mines were also targeted and cited in Pennsylvania, Virginia and Alabama.
Mitt Romney campaigns Monday in Avon Lake, Ohio., Mitt Romney campaigns Monday in Avon Lake, Ohio., As the presidential race zeroes in on Ohio, and the auto industry gets renewed focus in the all-important swing state, Mitt Romney's campaign is touting the backing of former Chrysler CEO Lee Iacocca and the company's former president, Hal Sperlich., In our opinion, Mitt Romney is the leader we need to help turn our economy around and ensure that the American auto industry is once again a dominant force in the world, Iacocca and Sperlich write on Romney's website., Iacocca, 88, has been retired from Chrysler for two decades, and Sperlich, 82, even longer. But the support especially of Iacocca, who was once the face of the U.S. auto industry could be important., In their testimonial on the Romney site, the men note that Romney's father ran American Motors and say: Mitt Romney is most certainly a car guy., The men do not mention the 2009 U.S. auto bailout of Chrysler and General Motors, which President Obama orchestrated and Romney opposed., Chrysler got another bailout in 1980 when Iacocca and Sperlich ran the company. But then, Congress made Chrysler get private financing for $1.5 billion; the government then acted as loan co-signer. It also required that the company get $2 billion in concessions and cost savings., That 1980 model is essentially what Romney called for in lieu of the most recent bailout, though in 2009, many argue that there was no private financing available., The endorsement of Iacocca and Sperlich comes as campaign ads from the Romney campaign are suggesting that General Motors and Chrysler are adding jobs in China at the expense of the jobs in the United States. The Obama campaign has loudly criticized the ads as inaccurate., And GM spokesman Greg Martin said in an email Wednesday: We've clearly entered some parallel universe during these last few days. No amount of campaign politics at its cynical worst will diminish our record of creating jobs in the US and repatriating profits back to this country., General Motors has plans to expand in China, but economics as well as Chinese rules make it essential for an automaker who wants to sell cars in China to build them there. And Chrysler's announcement that it would begin production in China has been seen as a sign of the continued health of the company. Both companies rushed to say that they are not moving U.S. jobs to China., It's important to note how important the auto industry is to the economy of Ohio. One out of eight adults in the state works in the industry. And much of the talk during the campaign has been about the American car companies and Chinese trade., Most cars produced in Ohio are from Japanese brands. Next week, Honda will celebrate its 30th anniversary of making cars in the United States. In Marysville, Ohio, to be exact.
While we're on the subject of devastating storms, consider a report published last year by the National Hurricane Center. The title alone makes it worth a look:, THE DEADLIEST, COSTLIEST, AND MOST INTENSE UNITED STATES TROPICAL CYCLONES FROM 1851 TO 2010 (AND OTHER FREQUENTLY REQUESTED HURRICANE FACTS), Specifically, the report breaks down deadliest from 1851-2010, and the most expensive from 1900 to 2010 (monetary damages aren't available for the earlier storms)., One really striking thing when you look at the list of the costliest storms is that six of the 10 costliest storms occurred between 2000 and 2010 even after adjusting for inflation., Source: National Hurricane Center, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, Then again, as the report points out, our population and our cities are much bigger today than they were 100 years ago, and our standard of living is higher. A megastorm can destroy much more stuff today simply because there is much more stuff out there for it to destroy., So the authors also look back at historical hurricanes and estimate how much damage they would be likely to do if they hit the same area in 2010. That picture looks quite different., Source: National Hurricane Center, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, Still, even in this version, eight out of the 30 costliest storms took place between 2000 and 2010., BONUS: Here are both data sets as sortable tables., Top Ten Costliest Storms in 2010 Dollars, Top Ten Costliest Storms Adjusted For Population And Housing
In this handout image provided by Disney, Star Wars creator George Lucas has a playful lightsaber duel with Jedi Mickey Mouse at Disney's Hollywood Studios theme park at Walt Disney World Resort in Lake Buena Vista, Fla., on Aug. 14, 2010. Disney announced Tuesday that it was buying Lucasfilm Ltd. for $4.05 billion., In this handout image provided by Disney, Star Wars creator George Lucas has a playful lightsaber duel with Jedi Mickey Mouse at Disney's Hollywood Studios theme park at Walt Disney World Resort in Lake Buena Vista, Fla., on Aug. 14, 2010. Disney announced Tuesday that it was buying Lucasfilm Ltd. for $4.05 billion., Fanboys and -girls, get ready to celebrate or be disappointed: Disney announced Tuesday that it was buying Lucasfilm Ltd. for $4 billion, and continue the Star Wars franchise with the first of new series of films in 2015., Here's more from the news release issued by Disney:, Under the terms of the agreement and based on the closing price of Disney stock on October 26, 2012, the transaction value is $4.05 billion, with Disney paying approximately half of the consideration in cash and issuing approximately 40 million shares at closing. The final consideration will be subject to customary post-closing balance sheet adjustments., Lucasfilm founder George Lucas said the deal allows him a chance to pass the beloved Star Wars franchise on to a new generation of filmmakers., I've always believed that Star Wars could live beyond me, and I thought it was important to set up the transition during my lifetime, he said. I'm confident that with Lucasfilm under the leadership of Kathleen Kennedy, and having a new home within the Disney organization, Star Wars will certainly live on and flourish for many generations to come., Here's more on the deal:, Kathleen Kennedy, current Co-Chairman of Lucasfilm, will become President of Lucasfilm, reporting to Walt Disney Studios Chairman Alan Horn. Additionally she will serve as the brand manager for Star Wars, working directly with Disney's global lines of business to build, further integrate, and maximize the value of this global franchise. Ms. Kennedy will serve as executive producer on new Star Wars feature films, with George Lucas serving as creative consultant. Star Wars Episode 7 is targeted for release in 2015, with more feature films expected to continue the Star Wars saga and grow the franchise well into the future., The Star Wars franchise began in 1977 with the release of A New Hope. Five movies followed: Empire Strikes Back (1980), Return of the Jedi (1983), The Phantom Menace (1999), Attack of the Clones (2002) and Revenge of the Sith (2005). Combined, the movies have grossed more than $4 billion worldwide. The films have inspired generations of moviegoers and spawned a devoted fan base., Disney bought Marvel Entertainment, and its associated characters, for $4 billion in 2009. The studio has had mega-successes with movies such as The Avengers and Iron Man., Update at 4:45 p.m. ET More Details, In a conference call, Disney said the studio will also release episodes 8 and 9 of the franchise; Star Wars films will be released every two-three years., Disney, which bought animation giant Pixar, the makers of Toy Story and Nemo, for $7.4 billion in 2006, also acquires Lucasfilm's Indiana Jones franchise, as well as its movie-effects business, including Industrial Light and Magic and Skywalker Sound., If Disney is really trying to focus on the tentpole, event pictures, and given that this is something that has huge carryover value in the parks and merchandise business, it certainly makes sense, said Matthew Harrigan, an analyst at Wunderlich Securities in Denver, told Bloomberg News. This is just the paradigm of the sustainable Hollywood franchise., Update at 5:52 p.m. ET Lucas and Kennedy On Deal, There's a video up with Lucas and Kennedy, who produced E.T., discussing the deal and the new movies.,
Hear John Ydstie's Report On Sandy's Economic Impact, A truck drives through a flooded street caused by Hurricane Sandy in New York City's Financial District on Tuesday., A truck drives through a flooded street caused by Hurricane Sandy in New York City's Financial District on Tuesday., When Superstorm Sandy slammed into the East Coast on Monday, the fragile U.S. economy was just sitting there, stuck in a sluggish-growth mode., Now, as the massive cleanup begins, business owners, workers and investors are wondering what impact the megastorm ultimately will have on their wallets. Did Sandy weigh down economic activity enough to drown the recovery? Or will the rebuilding efforts boost growth over the longer term?, Economists say Sandy's negative effects will be huge, but the U.S. economy is enormous. On Tuesday, the emerging view held that once all of the costs are counted up, Sandy will have had a big and bad impact, but not one large enough to reverse the slow-moving recovery., IHS Global Insight, a forecasting firm, estimates that the megastorm's costs including interruption of business activity and damage to infrastructure will total $30 billion to $50 billion., That's a big number, but much lower than the one for Hurricane Katrina, which caused around $120 billion in damages. And on a national scale, $30 billion to $50 billion in economic losses would represent just about 0.2 percent to 0.3 percent of gross domestic product. That would knock the economy's current 2 percent growth rate back to where it was this summer, but it would not kill the recovery., In such a listless economy, where roughly 12 million people are seeking work, that dip would be unwelcome. The effect on growth for the fourth quarter will not be catastrophic but might still be noticeable, especially in an economy with little momentum anyway, IHS economists Gregory Daco and Nigel Gault wrote in their analysis of Sandy's impact., Without question, the storm's rampage will be a huge negative for millions of individuals, from cruise operators to waiters who will never get the tips lost during the storm and subsequent power outages., Here are some estimates for the storm's negative impact:, &mdash; As of Tuesday morning, about 8.1 million customers were without power in the affected areas, the U.S. Department of Energy said. That means millions of people couldn't get ready for work in the morning, or their place of employment was shut down., &mdash; IHS said Sandy idled about 70 percent of the East Coast's oil refineries, and with supplies already tight before the storm, gasoline prices could go up. But oil futures were little changed Tuesday afternoon and gasoline futures sank on speculation that the storm will cut demand as drivers stayed home and businesses were closed, Bloomberg News reported., But a megastorm can also have positive impacts as rebuilding begins. Here are some potential upsides:, &mdash; Roughly $10 billion in public infrastructure was damaged, the IHS economists estimated. That means state and local governments will have to hire more workers or give them longer hours to repair the roads, bridges, beaches and airports that were damaged., &mdash; And widespread power outages mean that grocery stores will see a short-term benefit once residents restock their refrigerators after throwing out spoiled food. And that's on top of the supplies people bought to get ready before the storm hit.
Oregon State University food science and technology students mix a batch of havarti cheese in a cheesemaking class., Oregon State University food science and technology students mix a batch of havarti cheese in a cheesemaking class., It's football season at Oregon State University, and that means tailgating, grilling, and ... cheese?, When we think of Oregon, we don't necessarily think of cheese maybe a nice Pinot Noir, but not cheese. But this fall, Oregon State University's new cheese plant rolled out its first batch of product: a specialty alpine cheese (like Swiss, Comte or Gruyere) dubbed by the students Beaver Classic. It's a mild cheese, with nutty flavors like caramelized onions., OSU started online sales this week, but home football game sales of the stuff have been under way since early September. The team started winning around the same time. I think that demonstrates the power of cheese, says Lisbeth Goddick, an extension dairy processing specialist and head of OSU's cheese program., The college creamery is a hallmark of many land-grant universities in the U.S. It gives students hands-on experience, provides food safety and production training to state businesses, tests products and flavors, and provides the campus (students, staff and alumni) with a healthy supply of milk, cheese, butter and most importantly, ice cream., What you see with these different creameries in different regions of the country is that each has their own niche products. At Wisconsin and Washington it's cheese, and ours is ice cream, says Tom Palchak, manager of Penn State University's Berkey Creamery, which boasts 150 flavors of ice cream. A lot of it has to do with tradition, and some draw on food formulas developed more than 50 years ago., Generally the grandest product, the ones with the most following, are the ice cream products, says Jason Huck, head of Cornell University's dairy plant., But OSU is going the gourmet cheese route., After 30 years of closed doors, OSU's cheese plant re-opened in 2009 with a new philosophy and a unique product. We certainly wanted to go with a specialty cheese type. We didn't want to go with a cheddar or a mozzarella, says Goddik. This meant bringing in equipment from France and Holland., Some other universities have gone a similar route with specialty cheeses: Washington State University produces specialty cheddar in a can (called Cougar Gold) and the University of Wisconsin at Madison makes gouda and juustolepias (a Finnish cheese) plus many commercial varieties. Huck says Cornell has developed a specialty cheddar, as well., In addition to educating students, the goal is grow the local dairy markets, not compete with them. In OSU's case, that also means growing the local artisan cheese market, which now consists of about 20 vendors. In the cheese business, startup costs can be quite pricey, so OSU allows cheesemakers to come in and use the plant to produce their first cheeses for up to a year. Then at least they can generate money. We've been quite successful in getting small artisan cheese companies off the ground, says Goddik. In 2003, Oregon had three artisan dairy companies. Today, the state has 25 artisan cheese companies and one artisan milk producer., Stateside, Vermont boasts the most artisan cheesemakers per capita, while Wisconsin produces about a quarter of the country's cheese (21 percent of which is artisan-made). So will there now be some campus competition among the curds and whey? Nah, there seems to be room for everybody., Wisconsin has an advantage because they have so much cheesemaking knowledge in the state, says Bill Klein, who manages UW Madison's Babcock Dairy Plant. It's frequently a family business, handed down from generation to generation., But Vermont's running strong. Jody Farnham, administrative director of the University of Vermont's Institute for Artisan Cheese (not a creamery, but a teaching facility), says, We think this rise in artisan cheesemaking is still rising. It hasn't peaked yet.
The floor of the New York Stock Exchange was empty of traders Monday, as New York's financial district braced for the onslaught of Hurricane Sandy., The floor of the New York Stock Exchange was empty of traders Monday, as New York's financial district braced for the onslaught of Hurricane Sandy., The New York Stock Exchange will reopen for regular trading Wednesday after being shut down for two days because of Hurricane Sandy., The exchange said in a statement Tuesday that its building and trading floor are fully operational., Tuesday marks the first time since 1888 that the NYSE remained closed for two consecutive days due to weather. The last time was due to a massive snow storm., Sections of Manhattan were inundated with water and power was shut off to thousands of people and businesses., Global markets rebounded Tuesday, though trading was subdued in the wake of the storm.
A worker installs carpet into a Jeep Liberty at the Toledo Assembly Complex in Toledo, Ohio, in 2011., A worker installs carpet into a Jeep Liberty at the Toledo Assembly Complex in Toledo, Ohio, in 2011., The impact of Superstorm Sandy has become the main focus of both presidential candidates, but what politicking does remain has Toledo, Ohio, at its center., That's because last week GOP presidential hopeful Mitt Romney stated that Chrysler-owned Jeep, which has a big plant in Toledo, is considering moving all its production to China., Chrysler and President Obama's re-election team say that's just not true, and the dispute is now being played out on what's become the campaign's center stage: the state of Ohio., The auto industry is a touchy subject for Romney unlike Obama, he opposed lending any public funds to help GM and Chrysler make it through bankruptcy, even though private banks refused to lend them any money., As the two men battle to win all-important Ohio, where 1 out of 8 workers is in the auto industry, Romney has generally been on the defensive about opposing a bailout. But last Thursday, Romney went on the offensive in Defiance, Ohio, about an hour's drive from the big Jeep plant in Toledo., I saw a story today that one of the great manufacturers in this state, Jeep, now owned by the Italians, is thinking of moving all production to China, he said., The story Romney referred to was a Bloomberg News report. But that story did not say Jeep would be moving all its production to China rather, Chrysler was considering reviving its presence in China to make Jeeps for that market., At a rally in Youngstown, Ohio, on Monday, Vice President Joe Biden denounced Romney's claim about Jeep, calling it bizarre., It's an absolutely patently false assertion, Biden said. It's such an outrageous assertion that one of the few times in my memory, a major American corporation, Chrysler, has felt obliged to go public and say there is no truth [in this]. They said Jeep has no intention of shifting production of its Jeep models out of North America to China., Biden spoke a day after the Romney campaign began airing a new ad in Toledo that says: Obama took GM and Chrysler into bankruptcy, and sold Chrysler to Italians who are going to build Jeeps in China., The ad, however, did not repeat Romney's original claim that all of Jeep's jobs may be going to China., He's done some clever wordsmithing, but the intent of the ad is completely dishonest, said Ken Lortz, Ohio director for the United Auto Workers. In a conference call Monday organized by the Obama re-election campaign, Lortz accused Romney of being willing to say or do anything to get elected., Romney's campaign going up with this ad has only angered Ohioans even further, he said. We knew he wasn't on our side when the economy and the industry were on the brink, but the fact that he would lie to our faces and try to deceive us is just too much., It's a fight that Team Obama clearly relishes because it centers on autoworkers and their jobs in Ohio. Before the day was over, the president's campaign was up with a new ad of its own., After Romney's false claim of Jeep outsourcing to China, Chrysler itself has refuted Romney's lie, the ad says. The truth: Jeep is adding jobs in Ohio., Jeep is indeed planning to invest half a billion dollars in expanding its facilities in Toledo, which is expected to add another 1,100 jobs to Ohio's economy. There was no immediate response from the Romney campaign to a request for comment.
Bertelsmann and Pearson announced Monday that they were merging their book publishing arms, Random House and Penguin. The new firm will be called Penguin Random House., Bertelsmann and Pearson announced Monday that they were merging their book publishing arms, Random House and Penguin. The new firm will be called Penguin Random House., There's big news in the world of publishing: The two conglomerates that own Random House and Penguin announced Monday that they were merging their book businesses to form a new company., German media company Bertelsmann, the owner of Random House, will own 53 percent of the new firm, Penguin Random House; Pearson, which owns Penguin, will control the rest. The merger, subject to regulatory approval, is scheduled to be completed in the second half of 2013., Writers like George Orwell, Salman Rushdie and E.L. James, the author of Fifty Shades of Gray, are now under the same corporate roof., In a statement, Thomas Rabe, Bertelsmann's chairman and CEO, said the merger could ensure the firm's future in the digital publishing realm., The combination of Random House and Penguin, first of all, significantly strengthens book publishing, one of our core businesses. Second, it advances the digital transformation on an even greater scale, and third, it increases our presence in the target growth markets Brazil, India and China., Marjorie Scardino, chief executive of Pearson, said the deal would allow both companies to share costs., It will allow the companies to invest more for their author and reader constituencies and to be more adventurous in trying new models in this exciting, fast-moving world of digital books and digital readers, she said., NPR's Lynn Neary reported on the deal on Monday's All Things Considered. Here's what she says about the merger:, The hope is that combining these two publishing powerhouses into one company will make easier to cope with the increasing popularity of ebooks which can be bought at a much lower price than print books., Dohle will be CEO of the new group when the deal is finalized. John Makinson, Chairman and CEO of Penguin, will become chairman of the board of directors., The Associated Press reports that the combined company will control 26 percent of the global consumer publishing market, leaping ahead of the 17 percent share of French publisher Lagardere. Here's more from the AP:, The announcement may also lay to rest the ambition of Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. of netting Penguin. Reports over the past couple of days have indicated that News Corp. had expressed an interest in buying Penguin for 1 billion pounds ($1.6 billion) in cash. News Corp. owns HarperCollins, another big publishing house.
Waves crash over a road as Hurricane Sandy comes up the coast Monday in Winthrop, Mass. Economists are predicting the storm will cost tens of billions of dollars., Waves crash over a road as Hurricane Sandy comes up the coast Monday in Winthrop, Mass. Economists are predicting the storm will cost tens of billions of dollars., Economists will need many days maybe weeks or months to assess the financial harm being done by Hurricane Sandy. But whatever the final figure, it will be huge, well into the tens of billions of dollars., More than 60 million Americans are feeling the impact of the weather monster slamming New York, New Jersey, Maryland, the District of Columbia, Virginia, Connecticut, Pennsylvania and many other states. The howling mix of wind, rain and snow is causing massive direct losses, i.e., the destruction of private homes, stores, boats and cars., But there will be much more to the final bill once economists add up the lost wages, lost restaurant sales and lost tax revenues, as well as the canceled flights and cruises. Federal, state and local government coffers will be diminished by the cost of rebuilding public infrastructure, such as beaches, roads, bridges and transit systems., And then there's Wall Street. The stock market was shut down on Monday and will remain closed again on Tuesday. Calculating the costs of two frozen trading days will be tricky., And the weather calamity is still far from over., The effects of the storm could be felt well after the last cloud passes, as power outages and structural damage take days or weeks to repair, John Challenger, CEO of outplacement firm Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas, said in a written assessment., For a sense of just how big the cost may be, consider that early estimates of direct damage caused by Hurricane Irene in 2011 were around $7 billion. But when the final count was in, economists put the damage cost estimate at two to three times that figure., It seems likely that Sandy will impose greater destruction of property (than Irene), and add to that the loss of about two days commercial activity, spread over a week across 25 percent of the economy, an initial estimate of the economic losses imposed by Sandy is about $35 to 45 billion, Peter Morici, economist and professor at the University of Maryland, said in a written assessment., Other economists have been putting out estimates that reach as high as $100 billion., But while the storm will have a huge negative economic impact, it also may have some short-term upsides, especially for retail outlets such as hardware and grocery stores. Customers rushed to stock up on emergency supplies in the days before the storm hit, and many will have to replace spoiled food in the wake of power outages., People have been buying just what you would expect: bottled water, toilet paper, ice, batteries, flashlights and of course, beer and wine, candy, chips and dips, said Kevin Kirsch, co-owner of the Chevy Chase Supermarket in a Maryland suburb just north of Washington, D.C., But Kirsch said that for many small-business owners, major storms are a double-edged sword. Generally, I'd prefer not to have storms, he said. For the bump up you get in business, if your power goes out, you come out way negative because of lost sales, as well as wasted inventory when spoiled meats and dairy products must be thrown away., Morici points out that whatever the immediate negative impacts of bad storms, they can have some long-term positive effects. Given that lots of construction workers are still unemployed in this slow-growing economy, the rebuilding efforts could unleash up to $20 billion in spending for reconstructing properties, he said., Many folks rebuild larger than before, Morici noted. As a result, the capital stock that emerges will prove more economically useful and productive., For example, on the shore, older smaller homes on large plots are replaced by larger dwellings that can accommodate more families during the summer tourist season, he said. The outer banks of North Carolina saw such gains several decades ago after rebuilding from a storm of similar scale.
Market failure., I'm holed up in my Brooklyn apartment right now with my wife and our two young daughters. Even if we lose power and get stuck inside for a few days, we'll be OK; like millions of other people up and down the East Coast, we stocked up this weekend on peanut butter and crackers and powdered milk and bottled water and cans of beans and tomatoes and tuna., The prices for all those things were the same as they always are. But if the grocery store had doubled or even tripled its usual prices in response to the pre-hurricane rush, we would have bought the food anyway. We needed it, and we didn't have time to shop around., As far as most economists are concerned, it would be totally reasonable for a grocery store to raise prices the day before a hurricane. In fact, that's what's supposed to happen. If prices don't go up when demand increases, you wind up with shortages. To an economist, empty shelves at grocery stores are evidence that prices were too low., In a famous study, the Nobel Laureate Daniel Kahneman and his co-authors asked ordinary people lots of questions about pricing and fairness. In one question, a hardware store raised the price of snow shovels from $15 to $20 the morning after a snowstorm., The higher price sends a signal to the world that says: Send more snow shovels! Someone who runs a hardware store an hour away might be inspired to put a bunch of shovels in the back of a truck and bring them to town, easing a potential shortage and, perhaps, driving prices back down., But, not surprisingly, 80 percent of people surveyed said raising the price of snow shovels after a storm would be unfair. Presumably, those people would also say it's unfair for a store to double prices on canned food the day before a hurricane., People feel so strongly about this that they've passed price gouging laws in many states, banning merchants from raising prices during hurricanes or other natural disasters. Today, governors and and other officials are warning merchants against price gouging; after the storm passes, there's a good chance we'll hear about some guy getting arrested for selling generators or bottled water or canned food at inflated prices., But that story will be the exception. Even in states without price gouging laws, most stores won't raise prices for generators or bottled water or canned food. Which raises a question: Why? Why doesn't price go up when demand increases? Why don't we see more price gouging?, The people Kahneman surveyed said they would punish businesses that raised prices in ways that seemed unfair. While I would have paid twice the normal price for my groceries yesterday, I would have felt like I was getting ripped off. After the storm passed, I might have started getting my groceries somewhere else., Businesses know this. And, Kahneman argues, when basic economic theory conflicts with peoples' perception of fairness, it's in a firm's long-term interest to behave in a way that people think is fair., So when my grocery store reopens after the hurricane, the price of a can of beans will probably be the same as it was last week, even if there's a line out the door and empty shelves inside.
Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney and President Obama debate on Oct. 22 at Lynn University in Boca Raton, Fla., Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney and President Obama debate on Oct. 22 at Lynn University in Boca Raton, Fla., Later this week we'll get another snapshot of the U.S. job market: the last unemployment report before next week's presidential election., Forecasters expect another sign of slow but steady job growth. Whoever is in the Oval Office next year will have to cope with a sluggish U.S. economy and confront some urgent policy decisions., One thing to keep in mind about the economy by the next Inauguration Day: It will be nowhere near the disaster of four years ago. Back then, employers were laying off hundreds of thousands of workers a month. Banks were in danger of collapse. And economic output was shrinking at a rate of nearly 9 percent., IHS Global Insight's chief economist, Nariman Behravesh, says while the economy is not yet healthy, it has vastly improved. Companies are slowly adding workers. The financial system has stabilized. And last Friday came word that output grew in the third quarter by a modest 2 percent., We've been stuck in this healing process for the last four years and it's slowly coming to an end and the economy is on the mend, Behravesh says., Home prices have finally started going up again, while gasoline prices have come down., Picking Up, Cutting Back, Richard and Janet Coover, who attended an Obama rally in Dayton, Ohio, last week, say they see things turning up. Richard is a machinist, and Janet works at a battery factory., The economy is starting to pick up. It's quite evident in this area. People that you know that have been looking for employment are now getting actual shots at positions, Richard says., And you see more and more jobs out there, Janet adds. And then I hear of friends getting jobs and everything. So I think it's really moving forward., A report on Friday showed consumer sentiment across the country now at its highest level since the fall of 2007. But just as consumers are starting to feel better and spend more freely, businesses have started cutting back., Kathy Trautman, the area manager of a Manpower office in Dayton that supplies temporary workers to manufacturers and other companies, says the trends were looking up in the first half of the year., But as of late July, we started to see a flattening or softening off. It's not the kind of drops that we saw in 2008, but it's more or less a lack of growth, she says., Trautman says that's partly because of a drop in demand in Europe and Asia and partly because of the cloud now hanging over Washington., Many of our clients seem to be in a holding pattern connected with this uncertainty of the direction, Trautman says., Over A Cliff?, That's one of the issues the man in the Oval Office next year will have to address to foster a more broad-based economic recovery. Not so long ago, business spending and exports were among the bright spots in the economy, while housing was in the dumps and consumers were sitting on their hands., Economist Behravesh says the situation has now reversed., If this is a four-cylinder car, it's only firing at two of the four cylinders, basically, he says. Housing, consumer spending are doing OK, but exports are not and business spending is not doing that well., Business people have long worried about the federal government's growing debt levels. But reversing the debt too quickly could be even worse., The first priority for Congress and the new president will be to prevent the fiscal cliff from happening, says Lynn Reaser, past president of the National Association for Business Economics., Reaser is talking about the big tax hikes and draconian spending cuts that are set to kick in automatically at the first of the year, unless lawmakers and the president head them off., This could really push the economy over the cliff and push us into recession, Reaser says., Both President Obama and GOP presidential nominee Mitt Romney have said they want to avoid the automatic spending cuts and most of the tax hikes, though Obama would allow taxes to go up for the wealthiest Americans., Facing Risks, Last week, the CEOs of dozens of big companies issued a statement urging lawmakers to adopt a long-term deficit-cutting plan that includes both spending cuts and new tax revenues similar to what the president's Simpson-Bowles commission recommended., Behravesh says that would be the best-case scenario. Worst case, he says, is continued gridlock., I would say the risk is that that uncertainty stays with us, he says. The politicians in D.C. continue to have this standoff, and this drags on. I think that's probably the biggest risk facing the U.S. right now., There are other risks, of course: A conflict in the Middle East could send gas prices soaring. Political breakdown in Europe could threaten the global financial system., If those shoes don't drop, though, whoever is in the White House could expect both growth and hiring to accelerate in the years to come. As to the policy debate that's now weighing on business people, that's within the power of Congress and the president to solve.
A construction worker finishes a roof in Chicago on Oct. 12. Signs of recovery in the housing market are springing up nationwide, but there's still a ways to go., A construction worker finishes a roof in Chicago on Oct. 12. Signs of recovery in the housing market are springing up nationwide, but there's still a ways to go., The economy has peppered political speeches for much of the presidential campaign. But talk of creating jobs has stolen thunder from the housing market., The epic housing collapse four years ago was a key ingredient in creating the Great Recession in the first place. Plus, boosting the housing market can be a boon for overall economic recovery., Beginning A 'Long-Term Cycle', Derek Thompson, senior editor at The Atlantic, follows the housing market. He says housing is a major driver of the overall economy because it impacts multiple sectors. When you buy a home, for example, you also buy things to put in it. When companies notice that kind of activity, they respond, he says., That knock-on effect is boosting stocks at Home Depot and Lowe's; they're trading at their highest prices in a decade. That, in turn, lures investors., Brian Peery of the California investment firm Hennessy Funds says he's hopeful., I think we're actually just beginning a long-term cycle here, he says. I think if you look at the home builders and the construction companies themselves, they're not quite optimistic yet, but they've certainly become less pessimistic., Denver real estate agent Victoria McCaskill, meanwhile, certainly is optimistic., What we're seeing now is low inventory ... lots of buyers in the marketplace, rents are up she says, and we're seeing a situation where it's almost difficult to find a home as a buyer. It's a multiple-bid situation in a lot of instances., Still, a number of false starts in the economy over the past few years have fallen flat. This time, according to Thompson, the growth is real if halting., The Recovery We've Been Waiting For, In the 1970s and '80s, Thompson says, housing and cars were major drivers in recovering from recession. They accounted for 50 percent of the recovery in the '70s and one-third of the recovery in the 1980s., And today, they're accounting for only about 10 percent of the recovery, Thompson says. So we're missing this huge, important engine of economic growth., He says there are a couple indicators to look for when assessing the housing market: Is housing being built and what kind?, One of the reasons why this recovery has been so disappointing is because we overbuilt in what's called single-family houses, Thompson says., But we've been lacking apartment complexes. He says that's starting to change. One of the driving forces in apartment construction is a nascent trend of young people moving out of their parents' homes. Rather than jumping into home buying, they're looking for apartments., Hopefully, once we see enough of these apartment buildings being built, we'll sort of hit a ceiling in the apartment sector, and then you'll see people starting to move out of apartments and into houses, Thompson says. And then you'll really have the housing recovery that we're all waiting for., Recovery is uneven, but in states that have been hit the hardest Michigan, California, Florida, Arizona and Nevada there are hopeful signs., As you look across the country, not everything is improving or declining at the same rate, he says. But you know what? That looks less like a recession and more just like a regular economy., Political Impact, Still, many homeowners are struggling with foreclosure and renegotiating their mortgages. With the presidential candidates relatively silent on the issue, Thompson says, voters are left wishing., Right now I think there [are] a lot of people who are sort of waiting and hoping that if Romney is elected, if Obama is elected, that they'll have a kind of secret plan to replace the current strategy with proactive policies that say ... 'We understand how important housing is to a recovering economy, and we're going to make sure that 2013 doesn't look like 2009 through 2012,' he says., As Americans await the election, there are still things holding buyers and investors back whether the mortgage deduction will still remain, for example, or the impact of problems abroad. Thompson says Congress could be another tripwire., Right now, the U.S. economy is recovering the private sector, at least at a decent pace. What would really hold us back is that this do-nothing Congress does nothing again and lets the fiscal cliff happen, he says., Thompson points to a Congressional Budget Office report that says the fiscal cliff would cut the average family's disposable income by about $2,000., So housing is a risk. You're always taking a risk when you make an investment, he says. And the question is: Are you more likely to take that risk when you know you're going to have a $2,000 hit the next year? I would say no. So the economy is doing OK, but Congress could still really screw it up.
The U.S. economy remains in a gray area, so it's no wonder that the presidential race is essentially tied., Gross domestic product grew at a 2 percent annual rate between June and September, according to figures out Friday. The White House says this means the economy has been growing for 13 straight quarters., This report provides further evidence that the economy is moving in the right direction, Alan Krueger, head of President Obama's Council of Economic Advisers, said in a statement., But the economy isn't performing nearly well enough, Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney said in a speech in Ames, Iowa, after the report came out., President Obama frequently reminds us that he inherited a troubled economy. But a troubled economy is not all that he inherited. He also inherited the greatest nation in the history of the Earth, Romney said. What he did with what he inherited made the problem worse., The final jobs report before the election will be released next Friday. The September report saw the unemployment rate fall below 8 percent for the first time in nearly four years but just barely, to 7.8 percent., That's how most of the economic data are looking now. Things are improving, but are nowhere near where an incumbent president would like them to be., I think the data are consistent with expectations, says Phillip Swagel, a public policy professor at the University of Maryland, who worked in the Treasury Department under President George W. Bush., The economy is growing, but at a modest pace, with only modest job creation and stagnant incomes for American families, Swagel says. Not recession, but not satisfactory., On the other hand, sustained if not tremendous growth makes it more difficult for a challenger like Romney to convince the voting public that a change in course is required., Recent polling shows Romney beating Obama in terms of whom voters would prefer to see managing the U.S. economy. In a Washington Post-ABC News poll released Thursday, 53 percent of likely voters said they trusted Romney more on the economy, compared with 43 percent who favored Obama., But an Associated Press-GfK poll out Friday showed a much narrower advantage for Romney on economic issues: 47 percent, compared with 45 percent for Obama., That poll also pointed to some economic optimism among voters, with nearly 60 percent saying they expect to see things get better over the coming year., Maybe it's direction that matters, says Thomas Hyclak, an economist at Lehigh University in Pennsylvania., If things are bad and getting better, it doesn't hurt the incumbent as much, he says. If things are bad and getting worse, it really does affect the chances for the incumbent., There's also some evidence to suggest that people's perceptions of the state of the economy is skewed by their partisan inclinations. That is, voters who support Obama are more likely to see the economy as improving than Republicans are. There's a huge partisan component to views about the economy, says Shanto Iyengar, a political scientist at Stanford University., A recent Purple Strategies poll found that 37 percent of voters in 12 swing states believe the economy is getting better. Ninety-four percent of those voters say they support Obama, compared with just 5 percent of those who believe the economy is getting worse., The economy is about where most economists would expect it to be at this point, Hyclak says. History suggests that a recession triggered by a collapse in the housing market and a financial crisis is bound to lead to a sluggish recovery with slow job growth., Yet the nation's economic growth remains at risk. The looming fiscal cliff has shaved 0.6 percent off of GDP growth this year and cost a million jobs, according to a report from the National Association of Manufacturers. And the mixed corporate earnings season has caused the stock market to zig and zag., Economists are predicting that the nation's financial picture will brighten over the next couple of years. The research firm Moody's Analytics predicts GDP growth will approach 4 percent in 2014, with unemployment coming down. And the latest forecast from the International Monetary Fund predicts annual growth of about 3 percent in the U.S. economy over the next four years, which would be much better than in other rich nations., Happy days might not be here again, but consumers are opening their wallets. Back-to-school spending was up this year, while holiday spending is expected to grow modestly. Recent GDP growth was driven by consumer spending and improvements in the housing market., A survey released Friday showed the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan consumer sentiment index at its most optimistic reading since September 2007., It's possible that people who do have jobs are starting to feel a little less uncertain than they were a couple of years back, suggests Hyclak, the Lehigh economist., Timing matters. The last one-term president, George H.W. Bush, lost his re-election bid in 1992 the it's the economy, stupid, election even though the economy was growing at a much faster clip than it is today., GDP grew by 3.8 percent in the summer of 1992 and was growing even faster by the time the election was held. Yet Americans did not feel as if the economy was recovering, Princeton University historian Sean Wilentz writes in his book The Age of Reagan. Rather, they thought Bush was out of touch with the suffering and anxieties of middle- and working-class citizens., Obama doesn't face those same image problems. Polls have consistently shown that Americans believe the president has a good feel for the hard times they're going through., Still, they're not convinced he's done enough to make things better. At least, a firm majority isn't convinced. And it may be too late at this point to change many minds., It will take a large dose of very good news or very bad news to affect the election at this late date, says John Sides, a political scientist at George Washington University. To me, the [new] GDP numbers are neither.
Alan Shull attends a job fair in Portland, Ore., on April 24., Alan Shull attends a job fair in Portland, Ore., on April 24., As the election draws closer, the economy and jobs remain top issues in the presidential race., President Obama points to the improvement in the labor market since he took office in the midst of a downward spiral., Both he and Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney have five-point plans for improving the economy, although their strategies differ., Romney claims his leadership would greatly improve the nation's economy: If we do those five things, our economy will come roaring back, Romney pledged at a rally in Iowa on Friday. We will create 12 million new jobs in just four years., It sounds like a very big number 12 million jobs especially coming out of a deep recession followed by three years of what many have described as lackluster job growth., But it's not as ambitious as it sounds., The 12 million jobs has been my forecast for quite some time, says Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody's Analytics., Zandi is in the economic forecasting business, and he expects the economy to add an average of 3 million jobs a year over the next four years, which would total 12 million jobs., Zandi adds that he doesn't know who will win the presidency. And for the purposes of this projection, it doesn't much matter., Cold hard facts. Politics completely aside. I'm just doing the numbers, says Zandi. I feel confident that we're going to create 12 million jobs over the next four years and we're going to feel a lot better about this economy, regardless of who is president., What makes him so confident? A lot of modeling and a deep dive into industry-level economic data. In particular, he expects the housing market to finally break out of the deep freeze it's been in since the financial crisis hit., The housing cycle's going to kick into gear. A lot more homes are going to be built, office buildings, retail space. House prices are going to rise, says Zandi. That's going to lift consumer spending and retailing and leisure and hospitality, and this is going to create a lot of jobs., Zandi isn't the only one predicting robust job growth. Joel Prakken, senior managing director of Macroeconomic Advisers, forecasts 11 million jobs added over the next president's term., That is not based on anyone's particular set of economic policies, Prakken adds., When he first heard Romney's 12 million jobs claim, Prakken says he scurried to his calculator. And what he found was Romney's campaign promise fit well with broad economic trends., It's not a projection that's incredible. It's just that it might happen anyway, Prakken says., Romney economic adviser John Taylor takes this and other similar forecasts as validation that the candidate has set a realistic goal., It's a solid estimate. It's a robust estimate. It's something that can be done with the right policies, Taylor says., Taylor, a professor at Stanford, and three other prominent conservative economists wrote a white paper making the case for Romney's economic plan. The argument in short this economic recovery has been weaker than those in the past because of Obama's policies. For his part, Obama isn't setting many specific economic goals for his second term, though he has said he'd create a million manufacturing jobs., Taylor says a Romney presidency with his plan for economic growth would lead to a more typical recovery., If we have that kind of recovery again, the prediction is you'd get about 12 million jobs. So that's one way to think about this, Taylor says., Of course, if the economic forecasters are right, we're poised for that more typical recovery over the next four years. No matter whose five-point plan is in place.
A GM assembly line in Lansing, Mich., A GM assembly line in Lansing, Mich., The U.S. economy grew at a 2 percent annual rate in the third quarter, the Bureau of Economic Analysis says., That follows growth (at annual rates) of 1.3 percent in the second quarter and 2 percent in the first., At 2 percent, the third-quarter estimate is a bit better than the 1.8 percent that economists were expecting, Bloomberg News says. But this is just the first of three estimates of third-quarter growth, and it's likely there will be revisions in coming months., In 2011, GDP expanded at:, &mdash; A scant 0.1 percent annual rate in the first quarter., &mdash; 2.5 percent in the second quarter., &mdash; 1.3 percent in the third., &mdash; 4.1 percent in the fourth., The economy, of course, is the top issue in this year's presidential campaign. The last major economic news due before Election Day on Nov. 6 is the October employment report, which the Bureau of Labor Statistics is scheduled to release next Friday Nov. 2 at 8:30 a.m. ET., The nation's official unemployment rate declined to 7.8 percent in September, BLS said earlier this month.
A Boeing 787 Dreamliner aircraft at the company's factory in Everett, Wash. Orders for aircraft drove the increase in demand for durable goods last month., A Boeing 787 Dreamliner aircraft at the company's factory in Everett, Wash. Orders for aircraft drove the increase in demand for durable goods last month., The number of first-time claims for unemployment insurance fell by 23,000 last week from the week before, to 369,000, the Employment and Training Administration says., Claims have bounced around in recent weeks, in part because of some changes in the way at least one state reports its figures., But overall, as we've said before, claims remain in the range where they've been stuck for a year, between 350,000 and 400,000., Also this morning, the Census Bureau reports that orders for so-called durable goods designed to last three or more years rose 9.9 percent in September from August the biggest monthly increase in nearly three years, according to The Associated Press and a bounce back from the 13.1 percent drop in August. Much of the September rebound was due to an increase in aircraft orders.
A drilling rig near Kennedy, Texas, on May 9. U.S. oil output is surging so fast that the United States could soon overtake Saudi Arabia as the world's biggest producer., A drilling rig near Kennedy, Texas, on May 9. U.S. oil output is surging so fast that the United States could soon overtake Saudi Arabia as the world's biggest producer., Gone from this year's presidential campaign are most mentions of climate change, environmental pollution, or green jobs. Former Gov. Mitt Romney, the GOP presidential nominee, prefers to call attention instead to the country's continuing dependence on foreign energy sources., I will set a national goal of North American energy independence by the year 2020, Romney declared in August., The line is now a standard part of Romney's stump speech, and he repeated it in his first two debates with President Obama., With that promise, Romney joins a long line of U.S. leaders who have preached the virtues of energy independence. Few, however, have explained precisely what this goal means., A Global Market, In truth, it would be virtually impossible for any country to be totally independent where energy is concerned. Not only would it have to produce all its own oil; it would also have to be independent of the global economy., Like sugar, wheat, gold and other commodities, oil is also bought and sold on a global market. All the oil produced in the world becomes part of the global oil supply; all the oil used comes out of that supply. The global oil price depends on the supply/demand relation, and the price is essentially the same for all countries., Energy analyst Amy Jaffe likens players in the global oil market to swimmers in a swimming pool., If you're in the deep end or the shallow end and somebody takes water out of the pool, it affects both swimmers equally, Jaffe says. [It's the] same thing if we start pouring water in. You're not pouring the water into just the deep end or just the shallow end., With oil, all countries are affected when the total supply is down relative to demand; the price goes up. When the supply is boosted and there is plenty of oil for everyone, the global price goes down., With respect to price, therefore, there is no such thing as energy independence. Even if the U.S. were producing as much oil as it was consuming, a halt in production by Iran or Saudi Arabia would still drive up the oil price in the U.S., Energy Security, But there is another way to think about energy independence. If a country produces as much oil as it uses, it is less vulnerable to some foreign country shutting the tap. Jaffe, executive director of energy and sustainability at the University of California, Davis, says this is the big reason governments want to reduce their dependence on foreign oil producers., If someone is going to cut off your supply, because they don't like your foreign policy or they want to keep you from attacking a country, this is a dangerous thing, Jaffe says., But is energy independence the proper term to describe the national goal?, I prefer the term 'energy security,' says Roger Altman, who served as deputy Treasury secretary under President Clinton., What that means, Altman says, is, 'Let's get to the point where the amount we import from rogue or potentially rogue nations who might be hostile to us is down to a point where, if suddenly that supply was interrupted or shut off, we go right on.' , The U.S. learned the importance of energy security in 1973, when Arab countries imposed an oil boycott on the United States to protest its military support for Israel in its war against Egypt and Syria. Americans were soon waiting in long lines at gas stations., In response to the Arab oil boycott, President Nixon set a new national goal in his 1974 State of the Union speech., At the end of this decade, in the year 1980, Nixon proposed, the United States will not be dependent on any other country for the energy we need to provide our jobs, to heat our homes and to keep our transportation moving., A Glimmer Of Hope, The fact that we are still talking about this goal nearly 40 years later shows how hard it is to achieve. But there is reason now to believe that energy security may finally be within reach. Energy production in the U.S. is booming, thanks in large part to new techniques for extracting oil and gas from hard-to-reach deposits., According to the latest estimates from the U.S. government's Energy Information Administration, U.S. production of oil and other liquid petroleum products could soon overtake production from Saudi Arabia, the world's No. 1 oil producer. Oil imports, meanwhile, are declining., U.S. energy demand remains high, however, and it is likely to be years before the United States has an energy supply entirely its own., Even in that case, however, the U.S. could significantly boost its energy security, because new production throughout the Western Hemisphere would leave the country less vulnerable to a shutoff from the Middle East or elsewhere., It doesn't mean we would never import another barrel of oil outside the Western Hemisphere, says Altman, who is now the chairman of Evercore Partners, an investment banking firm. What it means is that most of our oil imports would come from Canada, Mexico, Brazil and so forth, and whatever happened in the Middle East would have no severe downside for our economic stability., This is progress. It's hard to imagine how a conflict with Brazil or Mexico, much less with Canada, could jeopardize the U.S. energy supply., Increased energy security on the supply side, however, does not mean energy independence on the economic side. A smaller share of the oil we use in the U.S. comes from foreign sources today than was the case a decade ago. But an increase in the world oil price has left U.S. consumers paying more at the gas pump and reminded them of their continued dependence on market events beyond White House control.
Rajat Gupta as he arrived at the federal courthouse in Manhattan in June., Rajat Gupta as he arrived at the federal courthouse in Manhattan in June., Rajat Gupta, who was once a director at Goldman Sachs and Procter &amp; Gamble, has been sentenced to two years in prison, after a federal jury convicted him of insider trading., Gupta was convicted of leaking information to Galleon Rajaratnam, the billionaire co-founder of Galleon Group who was found guilty of fraud and conspiracy., The New York Times reports: , Mr. Gupta, 63, who ran the consulting firm McKinsey &amp; Company and served as a top adviser to the foundations of Bill Gates and Bill Clinton, is the most prominent figure to face prison in the government's sweeping crackdown on insider trading. He was also ordered to pay a $5 million fine., In a statement, the United States attorney in Manhattan, Preet Bharara, said of Mr. Gupta, 'His conduct has forever tarnished a once-sterling reputation that took years to cultivate.', 'We hope that others who might consider breaking the securities laws will take heed from this sad occasion and choose not to follow in Mr. Gupta's footsteps,' the prosecutor added., Gupta is scheduled to report to prison on Jan. 8. CNBC reports he read a statement, saying the past 18 months have been the most challenging period of my life since I lost my parents as a teenager., He continued: I regret terribly the impact of this matter on my family, my friends and the institutions that are dear to me. I've lost my reputation I built for a lifetime. The verdict was devastating.
The power of newspaper endorsements has faded, but candidates still compete for them., The power of newspaper endorsements has faded, but candidates still compete for them., This weekend, a slew of newspapers in key swing states including Ohio are expected to release their endorsements for the presidency and other elected positions., Such external validation is highly prized by candidates, but it's no longer entirely clear why., The Columbus Dispatch gave a strong endorsement of GOP presidential nominee Mitt Romney last week, saying President Obama had failed: Romney brings a wealth of executive experience in the private sector and the public sector that dwarfs that of Obama., The Dispatch is the dominant paper in central Ohio, a swing region in one of the most vital swing states for this presidential field., Voters Not Swayed, Yet even those voters who read the paper say they could have guessed who won its endorsement blindfolded., The Dispatch is traditionally a very conservative newspaper, said Matthew Burton, a 41-year-old stay-at-home father and Obama fan who lives just outside Columbus with his family. There's the saying they've always endorsed every Republican since Woodrow Wilson. I'd be more surprised if they endorsed a national Democrat., In interviews, a dozen voters suggested they put little to no stock in the editorials, even when they read the papers, and even when they fervently agree with those endorsements., Honestly, it doesn't influence me at all. There's definitely an underlying mistrust in the media from my perspective, said restaurant manager Mark Piscionari, a Romney supporter who said he preferred doing my own research and doing my own homework., The endorsement really has no impact on my thought or who I will vote for, said computer consultant Chris Malloy, who said he remained unsure of how he will vote. My opinion is as valid as the editor of the newspaper, and it's my vote, so I will decide for myself., I think the people should be the ones to make the decisions as opposed to these newspapers, said Himie-Budu Shannon, a deacon at an Episcopalian church. He said he will drive a bus from his church to voting stations on Election Day, a tacit move to get out the vote for his preferred candidate, Obama., He said it did not influence him for a moment that his hometown Cleveland Plain Dealer strongly supported Obama for a second term. Asked if he remembered when he last relied on newspapers for guidance, Shannon responded: As a child. Not since I became mature., Newspapers' Decline , It's not that these Ohioans and others like them are not plugged in. They said they follow politics closely through the Drudge Report, NPR, cable news, PBS NewsHour to the Economist and the Guardian. All cited online aggregators such as Google News and Yahoo News., That's reflective of newspapers' status in many markets: fading print monopolies struggling with sharply reduced paid circulation compared with a decade ago., Newspapers in some smaller cities dotted across the country still bear names that betray (or honor, take your pick) their partisan roots, such as Foster's Daily Democrat in New Hampshire and the Waterbury Republican-American in Connecticut., The move toward objectivity as a journalistic aim in reporting mirrored the decline of vibrant multi-newspaper towns, as surviving newspapers wanted to capture readers, not alienate them., Some major papers, including the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, the St. Paul Pioneer Press and the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, no longer make presidential endorsements. USA Today never did. And yet campaigns fixate over which candidate has won more, as the Washington Post recently wrote., On Wednesday, Obama yielded to criticism from the Des Moines Register, the largest paper in the swing state of Iowa, and allowed publication of the full text of his off-the-record interview with the newspaper's executives., David Holthaus. the new editorial page editor of the Cincinnati Enquirer, set modest goals for the paper's endorsement. He said it's a civic duty to give readers the benefits of the paper's research. The Enquirer is set to announce its choice this weekend., What we would like to see is our voice added to the voices across the country, Holthaus said, and, in that way, present what's important for our community and our readers and have a way to speak directly to the campaigns., Paul Beck, political science professor emeritus at Ohio State, said such editorials now only really matter for local races like judgeships., People who pay any attention to presidential politics have all this information about it, said Beck, who has tracked elections for more than 40 years. They've seen the candidates in the debates. They have seen ... countless ads on television so many that they are probably tuning them out as well. The newspaper endorsements are, I suspect, minor elements, if at all., Some polling from Pew Research Center and others offers some support for that conclusion., Can Newspapers Sway Undecided Voters?, One veteran of four Republican presidential campaigns, Dan Schnur, cited two factors: a shift in political strategy and a rise in polarization reflected both in the tone of new media outlets, such as Fox News and the Huffington Post, and the outlook of voters themselves., The primary goal of a presidential campaign in the 21st century is no longer to persuade a dwindling number of undecided voters but rather to find a way to inspire and excite and motivate your strongest supporters, said Schnur, the director of the Unruh Institute of Politics at the University of Southern California. A newspaper endorsement is much more effective at persuading someone who hasn't made up their minds., And yet for all that Schnur, who was the communications director for Republican John McCain's presidential bid in 2000, disagreed with what has become the new conventional wisdom outside political circles., If you are the newspaper in the most important swing market in the most important swing state in a very close presidential election, you still matter a lot, Schnur said. And the Columbus Dispatch endorsement really does matter., (Dispatch editorial page editor Glenn Sheller declined to be interviewed for this story, writing in an email that he did not trust NPR to treat Republicans or conservatives fairly.), Schnur said that Republicans could ensure that people far beyond the Dispatch's readership would learn of its endorsement, by incorporating it into TV advertisements, social media updates, radio commercials and direct mailings to convey momentum toward the White House and rally the faithful., So in this case, Schnur said, limited to a vital battleground region, Buckeye newspaper editorialists might well help stimulate a few more Romney voters to hustle to the polls, and help pick a president.
Austin Mitchell walks away from an oil derrick outside Williston, N.D., in July 2011. North Dakota is now the No. 2 producer of oil in the U.S. behind Texas., Austin Mitchell walks away from an oil derrick outside Williston, N.D., in July 2011. North Dakota is now the No. 2 producer of oil in the U.S. behind Texas., An oil boom is under way in the United States. Since 2008 domestic oil production has increased dramatically, reversing what was a nearly three-decade decline. That has some predicting the U.S. could overtake Saudi Arabia as the world's largest petroleum producer in coming years., In 2011 the U.S. produced 5.66 million barrels of crude oil a day, according to the Department of Energy's Energy Information Administration. By next year the agency projects that will increase 21 percent to 6.85 million barrels a day. Add in things like natural gas liquids, biofuels and processing gains at refineries and that number increases., By 2013, we'll probably be a little over 11 million barrels a day, says EIA administrator Adam Sieminski. That puts you pretty close to Saudi Arabia's production of more than 11 million barrels a day, he says., Saudi Arabia could increase production from its vast reserves. But just the prospect of approaching Saudi Arabia's production pleases those in the U.S. oil industry., It's very exciting, says Rayola Dougher, senior economic adviser for the American Petroleum Institute. We spend a lot on importing crude from around the world that we may not have to in years ahead., Much of the new oil produced in the U.S. is by unconventional means such as hydraulic fracturing, or fracking. That involves pumping huge amounts of water underground along with sand and some chemicals. The pressure breaks up shale formations and releases oil., The research company IHS released a report this week that shows unconventional oil and natural gas production supports 1.7 million jobs. The report projects that number will increase to 3 million jobs by 2020., It's about blue-collar jobs. These are good jobs. The average wage for these jobs is about $35 an hour, says John Larson, IHS vice president for public sector consulting., The new positions are in places like North Dakota, which is now the No. 2 producer of oil in the U.S. behind Texas. And the industry anticipates big expansion., Ohio, for example, they have great potential to be a major oil producer in the United States, Dougher says. She also points to promising shale plays in Texas, Louisiana, Alabama and Tennessee., But new technologies can carry new risks. Some worry hydraulic fracturing may pollute groundwater. Others warn there are potential problems in exploring for oil on new frontiers., Oil companies want to open up areas off the northern coast of Alaska in the Arctic Ocean, where they're not prepared to address a major oil blowout or spill like we had in the Gulf of Mexico, says Daniel Weiss, director of climate strategy at the Center for American Progress., The industry disputes that. Regulators are allowing Shell to drill exploratory wells in the Arctic with plans in place to respond to a spill., Still, Weiss says the overall goal should be reducing oil consumption, even as the industry touts its increasing production.
A Barnes &amp; Noble store in San Bruno, Calif. It's on the list., A Barnes &amp; Noble store in San Bruno, Calif. It's on the list., If you shopped recently at 63 Barnes &amp; Noble stores in nine states and used a credit or debit card there's a chance that thieves got hold of data about your accounts and your PIN., As the company has announced:, The tampering, which affected fewer than 1 percent of PIN pads in Barnes &amp; Noble stores, was a sophisticated criminal effort to steal credit card information, debit card information, and debit card PIN numbers from customers who swiped their cards through PIN pads when they made purchases. This situation involved only purchases in which a customer swiped a credit or debit card in a store using one of the compromised PIN pads., The retailer advises customers who used debit cards in the stores to:, &mdash; Change the PIN numbers on their debit cards., &mdash; Review their accounts for unauthorized transactions., &mdash; Notify their banks immediately if they discover any unauthorized purchases or withdrawals., And it advises credit card users to:, &mdash; Review their statements for any unauthorized transactions., &mdash; Notify their card-issuing banks if they discover any unauthorized purchases or cash advances., Where are the 63 stores? Here's the list (click on the title to pop up a larger version).
About 34 million taxpayers take the mortgage interest deduction, for a typical savings of approximately $600 a year., About 34 million taxpayers take the mortgage interest deduction, for a typical savings of approximately $600 a year., In coming months, Congress will begin an epic struggle to get the federal budget deficit under control. One tax break almost certain to come into play is the mortgage interest deduction., Both President Obama and his Republican rival, Mitt Romney, have suggested ways to scale back the deduction's value for wealthy taxpayers. And many economists are cheering them on, saying that now when interest rates are low would be a great time to reduce or even phase out the deduction., If we are going to have a serious effort at reform, this will have to be considered, said Mark Luscombe, principle federal tax analyst with CCH Group, a tax services and software firm., But no matter how much candidates and economists may want to push for changes to the mortgage interest deduction, many members of Congress will remain wary., Think about it: Not every congressman has a steel mill in his district, or a wheat farm or shipyard. But every district has a Realtor and someone who builds homes and a banker who wants to lend money. This deduction has been with us for a very long time, and the [real estate] industry lobbies heavily for it, Luscombe said., For a century, Congress has been allowing taxpayers to lower their annual federal tax bills by deducting the cost of the interest payments made on mortgages., 'They All Take The Deduction', The congressional Joint Committee on Taxation estimates about 34 million taxpayers take the deduction. Most people save roughly $600 annually by doing so. For many, that's the only big tax break they can get, and they love it. A Gallup poll last year found that 6 in 10 Americans oppose eliminating the deduction to help solve the budget deficit problem., Most everyone who buys a home gets a mortgage, Luscombe said. And among those who pay taxes and qualify, they all take the deduction, he added., People in the housing industry love it too. Realtors, mortgage brokers, homebuilders and other say that the deduction encourages people to buy, rather than rent. They say Congress must continue to provide the tax break to help the battered housing sector., The housing market is far too fragile to sustain any tax increases, Ron Phipps, 2011 president of the National Association of Realtors, told Congress in a letter last year. Even considering a phase-out of the tax break would send the wrong signal, he said., A Pricey Perk, But the deduction, which can be taken on up to two homes, is a pricey perk for homeowners at a time when the federal budget deficit is enormous. The deduction shrinks government coffers by about $83 billion a year, according to Congress' taxation committee., Supporters say that's a small price for government to pay to encourage Americans to own property. A home is the single largest investment most people will ever make, and broad-based ownership helps build a large middle class of property owners, according to the Realtors' association., A strong housing market offers long-term social and financial benefits to individual homeowners, the Realtors said in a research paper. Areas where people own homes have better educational outcomes, more civic participation, lower crime and other benefits, the trade group says., But critics say the Treasury can't afford the deduction, and in any case, it's bad public policy because it encourages people to take on too much debt, discriminates against renters and favors people with upper incomes., Driving Up Housing Costs?, Conservative Joseph Farah, author of The Tea Party Manifesto, recently wrote in a column: It makes perfect economic sense to get rid of the mortgage-interest deduction. It seems like a benefit to homeowners carrying mortgages, but it actually is one of many factors driving up the cost of housing, the scarcity of mortgage loans and interest rates., Romney is suggesting setting a dollar limit on deductions for each tax filer who itemizes. One number he tossed out in the first presidential debate was $25,000 a year. Anybody can have deductions up to that amount, he said., In other words, individual taxpayers could decide which deductions they want to take, but only up to the cap. So, some filers might choose to take the mortgage deduction, while others say, seniors who rent might want to take deductions for charitable giving, municipal bond interest payments, etc. They could have all the deductions that work best for them, up to the limit. Wealthier people, especially those with two homes, would hit the cap quickly, so Romney's proposal would trim the value of the deduction for them., A Campaign Issue, Obama is taking a somewhat different approach, saying he would protect the tax break for people in the middle income brackets, but eliminate it for those taxpayers making more than $250,000. I refuse to ask middle-class families to give up your deduction for owning a home or raising kids just so we pay for another millionaire's tax cut, Obama said on the stump last month while discussing ways to balance the budget., Luscombe, the tax analyst, said he believes Congress probably will try to reduce the value of the deduction in some way perhaps setting a cap or limiting it to just one home., Proponents of change have one advantage now: Interest rates are so low that homes are, for the most part, at affordable levels. When the Federal Reserve's policymakers end their two-day meeting Wednesday afternoon, they are expected to announce they'll continue pushing down on mortgage interest rates.
Barnard College graduates listen to President Barack Obama at commencement ceremonies on May 14, 2012., Barnard College graduates listen to President Barack Obama at commencement ceremonies on May 14, 2012., A startling new report finds freshly graduated college women will likely face this hurdle when entering the work world: they're worth less than equally educated men., The American Association of University Women is releasing a new study that shows when men and women attend the same kind of college, pick the same major and accept the same kind of job, on average, the woman will still earn 82 cents to every dollar that a man earns., The study, called Graduating to a Pay Gap, points out that job choices may initially explain the problem. For example, many women choose lower paying industries, such as teaching or social sciences, while men select jobs in science and technical industries, which pay more., So, as the Washington Post notes, the authors tried to make everything as similar as possible. They tracked graduates with identical collegiate experiences, limited familiarity with the work world, and those who didn't have spouses or children., But the wage gap persisted., The study found that in teaching, female college graduates earned 89 percent of what men did. In business, women earned 86 percent compared to men. In sales occupations, women earned 77 percent of what men took home., Why would equally educated women and men with similar life experiences bring home very different paychecks?, There are a few reasons cited. One is potential gender discrimination, according to the authors, who say more women are filing complaints about their work condition. Experimental evidence confirms that many people continue to hold biases against women in the workplace, especially those who work in traditionally male fields., There's another, intriguing reason that women could earn less: they don't like to negotiate their salaries, or they're unable to do so. Negotiating a salary can make a difference in earnings, and men are more likely than women to negotiate their salaries. In part, this difference may reflect women's awareness that employers are likely to view negotiations by men more favorably than negotiations by women, the authors write., The wage disparities mean women have more trouble paying bills, especially paying back college loans. In 2009, about 47 percent of women paid more than eight percent of earnings toward student loan debt compared with 39 percent of men, according to the AAUW. The authors say these numbers have gone up since then., Journalism professor Michele Weldon nails the problem in an essay for al Jazeera. She's writing recommendation letters for several of her female students graduating from Northwestern University. While praising each student's achievements, Weldon is thinking of adding these lines to each letter:, I respectfully request that you offer her the same salary as a male candidate with her qualifications. If your company already has this gender balanced practice, I applaud you for your fairness., Among the AAUW authors' recommendations: Congress should adopt new laws beefing up federal equal pay laws. And they urge women to pay attention to their own life choices, and recognize the long term implications when they decide on college majors and professions.
What's the lowly house fly got to do with the $60 billion fish farming industry?, Quite a lot, says Jason Drew, a jet-setting British entrepreneur who is so enthusiastic about the potential of flies, he's just written a book called The Story of the Fly and How It Could Save the World. He thinks flies can solve one of aquaculture's most vexing issues: what to feed the growing ranks of farmed fish., Farm-raised salmon, trout and shrimp need a lot of animal protein in their diet. Right now, that protein comes mainly from small, wild fish that are turned into fish meal. It takes about 3 pounds of fish to produce 1 pound of farmed salmon, and as we continue to deplete wild fish stocks, fisheries experts say we're going to run out., And so aquaculture experts all over the world are scrambling to figure out what to do about it., A few years back, Drew was checking out some farms in Saudi Arabia that were exporting chicken and shrimp to South Africa, where he lives. He saw all the fish meal going to feed those creatures, and got to thinking just how unsustainable it was., He also noticed, he says, that the price of fish meal was moving in one direction only: up. Unless we find a new sea., At a slaughterhouse in Saudi Arabia, he stumbled upon what could become the new sea: a huge pond of blood, buzzing with flies. After consulting with some scientists, Drew became convinced that flies could recycle the protein in animal blood and replace fish meal to feed fish, chicken and other animals., He was so convinced, he founded a company to give it a shot. In 2009, his company, AgriProtein, purchased its first batch of flies to breed for industrial production. After a couple of years of tinkering, his team figured out how to produce protein-rich larvae in bulk. It helps that one fly can lay up to 1,000 eggs, and 1 pound of eggs can grow into 380 pounds of larvae., The fly larvae in the AgriProtein factory feed on cow blood and bran., The fly larvae in the AgriProtein factory feed on cow blood and bran., Today Drew has a fly factory up and running near Cape Town and is selling his Magmeal, a brown crumbly protein meal made of maggots, or fly larvae, to South African salmon and chicken farms. By next year, he says his factory will be producing 100 tons of fly meal a day. That's 100 tons we don't have to take out of the sea, he says. And we can't keep up with demand., At one end of the factory the mother flies lay their eggs. Members of Drew's staff extract the eggs, but save a small number of them to put back into the breeding stock. They take the remaining eggs and hatch them into larvae, where they're fed a rich meal of blood from a nearby slaughterhouse, plus bran. After two or three days, they're the perfect size for harvesting and are ground into Magmeal., Drew says it's only a matter of time before more entrepreneurs around the world discover fly farming., What we've done is just industrialize a natural food source, he says. It takes a fair bit of cash to get off the ground, but I believe small-stock farming is going to be one of the great businesses of the next 20 years. And he's already talking to people around the world who want to license his technology., Of course, the search for a fish meal replacement goes far beyond flies. Researchers at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration are looking for ways to use more marine algae, fish processing trimmings and plants in fish feed. And as we reported last year, other scientists think biofuel co-products, poultry byproducts and soybeans have potential, too.
Machinarium from Amanita Design is an adventure game centered a robot who has been sent to the scrap heap. Players solve puzzles to help the robot return to the city., Video game makers are rolling out their new titles with a wide range of creativity and style just in time for the holiday shopping season. Jamin Warren, founder of Kill Screen magazine, shares his list of video games you should keep your eye on:, NintendoLand is a theme park game with different activities designed for Nintendo's new hand-held game console Wii U. It was presented at the Electronic Entertainment Expo in Los Angeles in June., NintendoLand is a theme park game with different activities designed for Nintendo's new hand-held game console Wii U. It was presented at the Electronic Entertainment Expo in Los Angeles in June., Nintendoland: The marquee release for Nintendo's Wii U console, this title shows what Nintendo does well: pure family fun. I tried several of the mini-games within Nintendoland and was dazzled by their simplicity. In one, I simply had to play tag with four others and found myself laughing the entire time. The Wii U is also a referendum on Nintendo's future: Despite the dominance of the Wii, the emergence of iOS and Facebook games have chipped at Nintendo's core audience. If the Wii U sells poorly, the 100-year-old game maker may be on the ropes., Machinarium: A point and click adventure game set in hand-drawn apocalypse about a little robot looking for his place in a lost world. Notes of the Tim Burton-produced animated feature 9., In The Unfinished Swan, players navigate an entirely white landscape by shooting their surroundings with a paint gun., In The Unfinished Swan, players navigate an entirely white landscape by shooting their surroundings with a paint gun., The Unfinished Swan: The game opens with an amazing sequence: an entirely white space in which the player, a boy named Monroe, is chasing after a swan that has escaped a painting. You are equipped with a paint gun using the first-person perspective so the world can be painted black and thus show you where you need to go., Professor Layton and the Miracle Mask: I loved these Japanese adventure games for their novel take on puzzles and adventure. Consider this Encyclopedia Brown for the modern age. Brain-twisting puzzles are merged with a carnivalesque city setting as you hunt to unravel the secrets of the town., Call of Duty: Black Ops II: This will be one of the biggest games of the year as the past Black Ops generated more than $1 billion in sales. These games are the closest to the big-budget sheen of films like The Avengers, and in this sequel to the long-running franchise, you are various secret agents working behind the scenes from the Cold War to the near future. Also, you can ride a horse., Connor, who is British and Native American, is the new protagonist in Assassin's Creed III., Connor, who is British and Native American, is the new protagonist in Assassin's Creed III., Assassin's Creed III: The previous versions of AC have paid close attention to historical detail in Crusades-era Jerusalem and then Renaissance Italy. ACIII takes place during the American Revolution as you play Connor Kenway, part English and part Native American, drawn into the conflict. The game also features several notable characters from the time period, including Benjamin Franklin, King George III and Samuel Adams.
After initial worries that family-centered stories might seem uncool to young viewers, ABC Family embraced the idea and now focuses much of its original programming on family dynamics, such as those in Switched at Birth., In a sterile white boardroom in ABC Family's headquarters in Los Angeles, two young women are assiduously ignoring a spread of cookies in favor of two more important things: their laptops and a live broadcast of the show Pretty Little Liars playing on a large flat-screen TV., Dalia Ganz, 28, is the show's social-media manager. She's patiently teaching one of the beautiful young actors on the show how to live-tweet this episode., Include #prettylittleliars in your answers, she instructs. That is a literal transcription of her words., The popularity of ABC Family shows like Pretty Little Liars has encouraged mainstream stars like Adam Lambert to get in on the action., The popularity of ABC Family shows like Pretty Little Liars has encouraged mainstream stars like Adam Lambert to get in on the action., Over the next hour, Ganz will post pictures of actor Gregg Sulkin handsomely tweeting away on the show's Facebook page (where it will almost instantly receive hundreds of thousands of likes). She will tweet relentlessly and toss virtual goodies to fans. And she will obsessively monitor the show's popularity online. Pretty Little Liars is one of the most popular TV shows on Twitter, dominating trending topics and generating hundreds of thousands of tweets during the broadcast of every episode., ABC Family's savvy social-media practices have contributed to its impressive ratings. Over the summer, the network was No. 1 in prime time for girls and women ages 12-34. Pretty Little Liars was TV's top series for the same demographic., Focusing on that group makes all the sense in the world to ABC's head of research, Charles Kennedy., They're huge, he says of the generation known as millennials. They're going to redefine brands the way baby boomers did., Danielle Mullin, a marketing executive for the network, says one important element of its strategy is the social media team's cheeky, constant online presence., We act like a friend to our fans, she says. And friends don't only talk to you between 9 and 5. And friends don't use a corporate tone of voice when they talk to you. So they actually do think they're speaking to their friend. And that's really an incredible opportunity for marketers., 'Family' Turns Out Not To Be Such A Bad Word, Technology has always meant intimacy to this generation, so social media and texting are key to ABC Family shows, in terms of both storylines and audience engagement. Diana Gal, 22, is a fan of Pretty Little Liars partly because she enjoys the social-media aspect. And she's noticed the network cannily taps into pre-existing fan bases. Pretty Little Liars, for example, is a little like the CW's Gossip Girl., So I think they're building off of things they already know will work, Gal observes. And they've done a good job of it., But ABC Family launched its breakthrough hit The Secret Life of the American Teenager, about a girl who gets pregnant at 15, before MTV began airing a reality show called 16 and Pregnant., The network's slightly edgy scripted shows filled the gap left by the WB network. ABC Family has gone through a few reinventions over the years. It started 20 years ago as The Family Channel. It was owned by the Christian Broadcasting network. It was sold to Fox, then Disney, which also owns ABC with the proviso that the word family had to remain in the name., Kate Juergens now runs the network's programming and development. She says at the beginning, executives feared the word family would alienate teen viewers., When we first came in the door, it was thought, 'Oh my god, it's such a burden,' she recalls., But research proved that the wordfamily is no longer necessarily uncool for 15-to-30-year-olds today. They're more connected with their parents than previous generations. Indeed, they often still live with them., Broadway veteran Sutton Foster stars in the ABC Family show Bunheads, which, while focusing on adults, is still popular with ABC Family's demographic., Broadway veteran Sutton Foster stars in the ABC Family show Bunheads, which, while focusing on adults, is still popular with ABC Family's demographic., A unique aspect about the millennials is an incredible closeness they have with their parents, says Kennedy., So ABC Family took a risk. Rather than playing down the family label, it decided to make families central to its brand what families are, the choices they make, how people fit in or not., And parents are powerful characters in every ABC Family show, including Switched at Birth, a show that explores all kinds of dynamics through a domestic prism., Our family on our show is Latina, deaf, two [economic] classes mixed and that's very millennial, right? observes creator Lizzy Weiss., Her lead characters are two teenage girls who were literally switched at birth in the hospital. One is deaf, and Switched at Birth includes extended sequences subtitled while characters use American Sign Language. Juergens says she never saw this as a problem. After all, she points out, reality shows subtitle English speakers all the time. It just seemed like an exciting new way to tell a story., It did feel risky to Weiss., I felt it was really ballsy, actually, she says. And that's when I thought, wow, I am so excited to be at this network actually taking chances together., Betting The Future On 'Bunheads' And Its Fans, Chances like Bunheads, a show on a channel for teenagers about the fractious relationship between a 40-year-old woman and a 60-year-old woman. But Juergens insists Bunheads was not a risk either., It was my team's favorite script last year coming out of our development process, she says, noting that it was written by Amy Sherman-Palladino, who created the much-loved Gilmore Girls for the WB. And we thought, well, we all love it, and we have to make it. And we tested it with our millennial audience, and they all responded to it., Juergens hoped Bunheads would broaden ABC Family's audience and it has pulled in older female viewers. But ABC Family is still banking on younger women. Research shows that more millennial women will graduate from college than young men. They're going to be leaders, decision-makers. And it's possible the most coveted audience, 18- to-35-year-old men, will cede that spot to 18- to-35-year-old women., Whose favorite shows, as it may happen, are on ABC Family.
Most of us know someone who's had a hard time finding or keeping a job over the past few years. It's an experience that often leaves people feeling defeated and demoralized. In Weekend Edition Sunday's Working It series, hear audio portraits of people whose daily lives are filled with uncertainty.
It's not just nutritionists who have a problem with sugar these days, so does organized labor. The AFL-CIO is calling for a boycott of one the country's biggest sugar producers, the American Crystal Sugar Company, based in Moorhead, Minn. American Crystal locked out 1,300 union workers more than a year ago, when those workers rejected the company's offer for a new contract. It has been operating with replacement workers ever since., The dispute, according to excellent reporting from our colleagues at Minnesota Public Radio, revolves around health coverage and the role of seniority in filling open positions in the company., Supporters of American Crystal Sugar Co. workers, who have been locked out of the company's sugar beet processing plants since 2011, rally in the North Dakota Capitol., Supporters of American Crystal Sugar Co. workers, who have been locked out of the company's sugar beet processing plants since 2011, rally in the North Dakota Capitol., There's an odd aspect to this labor dispute. The sugar business, and the sugar beet industry in particular, is as close to a planned economy as you'll find in American agriculture. It's paradoxical to see such a spectacular blowup in an industry that depends on carefully negotiated deals to ensure its own survival., At the national level, the domestic sugar industry has persuaded the government to put tight restrictions on cheap imports, reserving most of the U.S. sugar market for U.S. producers. Those producers, in turn, tacitly agree not to play hardball with each other. They don't go out and invest in expanding production, because that would drive down sugar prices., At the local level, meanwhile, about half of U.S. sugar comes from sugar beets, and that side of the industry is dominated by farmer cooperatives. American Crystal, for instance, is owned by sugar beet farmers in the Red River valley of Minnesota and N. Dakota. Every year, the cooperatives decide how many acres each farmer should plant with sugar beets, so as to produce just the right amount: Not too much and not too little., It's a tidy system, aimed at job security. It makes sure that sugar producers don't have to worry too much about wild swings in the market. Nobody (usually) makes profits that are too outrageous; if they did, new companies might jump into this business and upset the apple cart. When the U.S. government sees a shortage of sugar developing, it lets in more sugar imports to satisfy our cravings and rebuild domestic stocks of sweetness., I should note, though, that there has been some turmoil in the domestic sugar market lately, because in 2008 a new and unpredictable player arrived on the scene. Mexican sugar producers now can export freely to the U.S. For this planned economy to work, U.S. officials have to know how much sugar to expect from Mexico before they decide how much additional imported sugar, beyond Mexico's, that they should permit to enter the United States. In recent years, Mexican imports were less than expected, prices spiked, and sugar beet producers made out very well., So what's not to like? Well, big domestic buyers of sugar, such as candy makers, don't like it at all. They'd prefer free markets, letting them import cheap sugar from Brazil., And now, it seems that there are cracks within the sugar industry, too, as the farmer-owners and workers at American Crystal Sugar fight over how to distribute this system's benefits. In the past, both sides have lobbied in lockstep to defend price supports for sugar. But John Riskey, president of the local union that represents the workers, told Minnesota Public Radio that the union now will switch sides and lobby Congress to end the system that supports sugar prices.
A sold sign in San Francisco in August., A sold sign in San Francisco in August., There was a 1.7 percent drop in sales of existing homes in September from August, the National Association of Realtors says., But the median selling price compared to one year earlier was up for the seventh month in a row, leading NAR chief economist Lawrence Yun to say we're experiencing a genuine recovery., According to NAR:, The national median existing-home price for all housing types was $183,900 in September, up 11.3 percent from a year ago. The last time there were seven consecutive monthly year-over-year increases was from November 2005 to May 2006., One reason for the dip in sales: The nation's inventory of homes those for sale on the market fell 3.3 percent during the month to 2.32 million, Reuters notes. So would-be buyers had fewer homes to choose from, which could mean that some just haven't yet found the ones they want.
The Dow Jones industrial average dropped more than 500 points on Oct. 19, 1987, in the stock market crash known as Black Monday., The Dow Jones industrial average dropped more than 500 points on Oct. 19, 1987, in the stock market crash known as Black Monday., Chicken Little was running wild 25 years ago today. But one could hardly blame the poultry for panicking., On Oct. 19, 1987, the stock market plunged a record-setting 23 percent. The next day, the New York Daily News' front page screamed Panic! and a New York Times headline asked: Does 1987 equal 1929?, Turns out, the 1987 plunge was a mere stutter step. The Dow Jones industrial average, which closed at 1,739 that day, quickly bounced back. Within a decade, the stock-price average had nearly quintupled., Financial advisers say the lesson was clear: The stock market rises over time; invest for the long haul., But millions of small investors are no longer listening to that advice. Yes, it's been a quarter century, with the Dow industrials standing at 13,549 at the start of this silver-anniversary date. But there have been terrifying plunges along the way., The 2008-09 collapse, in particular, left scars. Between March 2008 and March 2009, the DJIA was cut nearly in half, plunging from 11,740 to 6,547. And don't forget the May 6, 2010, flash crash when prices fell straight down and bounced back for no apparent reason and all within minutes., Thursday brought another reminder of the frightful volatility of Wall Street. Shares of Google knocked down by a surprise release of quarterly earnings tanked so suddenly that individual investors found themselves losing money before they had a chance to sputter: What the heck?, So while the stock market has been moving back up to near where it was before the Great Recession, many people just aren't impressed by experts' stay-the-course advice., I'm 69 years old now, and I've been through all of it, said David Wilmot, an attorney in Washington, D.C. He's seen the unexplained drops, the super-high-speed transactions, the insider-trading prosecutions all of it. And it doesn't look good to him anymore., ^DJI data by YCharts, NOTE: Gray bars indicate recession., On Thursday morning, he met with a financial planner to go over his investment strategy for his 70s and beyond. For him, that means making mostly supersafe cash investments because he fears risks coming from Europe and China, as well as from Capitol Hill, where lawmakers must fix the so-called fiscal cliff, a collection of looming budget problems., He wants safety. As you get older, your perspective changes, he said., Lots of people have had their perspectives change since the market peaked in October 2007, with the Dow at 14,165. Even though their 401(k) retirement accounts may be looking healthier than they have in years, the results are uninspiring., Say that in October 2007, you had put $14,165 into a stock fund that perfectly tracked the Dow. As of Friday's market opening, you'd have $13,549. That would be a loss of $616. Add in the impact of inflation and it's like you've lost $687 over five years. Quite a deal not., So while Wall Street analysts are applauding the stock market's rise this year up 10.9 percent so far many small investors are sitting on their hands, and wallets. Only 46 percent of U.S. households have money in stocks or stock mutual funds, compared with 59 percent in 2001, according to the Investment Company Institute, which represents mutual funds., Not only do fewer people own stock mutual funds, but they are reducing the amounts they hold in them. Over the past three years, outflows from mutual funds have totaled $546 billion, the Investment Company Institute says., In terms of small investors, the good old days were the late 1990s when stocks soared. Then the tech bubble burst in 2000, the recession hit in 2001 and the financial crisis tanked everything in 2008., Still, this is America. And many people remain optimistic about investing. Julius Terrell, another attorney, was having lunch with Wilmot, his wary, older friend., Terrell, 45, has a wife and 12-year-old son. He needs his savings to grow to fund his son's college education and ensure a comfortable retirement for himself and his wife. He plans to continue investing and keeping his eye on those charts that show over the long haul it's wise to invest in corporations., I'm still taking risks, Terrell said. Everything happens in cycles. You just have to be prepared to wait it out until the cycle turns back up, he said.
When our series began yesterday, we brought together five economists from across the political spectrum and had them create a platform for their dream presidential candidate. It's a platform Get rid of a tax deduction for homeowners! Raise the price of gas! that would sink any real candidate., But we aren't creating a real candidate. We're creating a fake candidate. And to help us, we talked to two veteran political consultants Hank Sheinkopf and Kim Alfano., You have a radical plan which will bankrupt families, Alfano told us. You're insane., I think you should move to another country, Sheinkopf said., Canada, maybe?, Not even Canada, he said. Some of this won't fly in Canada., And after they both finished laughing at the economists' ideas, the consultants agreed to help us create a campaign for our fake candidate., Sheinkopf's first piece of advice: Don't be so brainy., Take, for example, our economists' plan to eliminate the mortgage-interest tax deduction. We shouldn't mention that getting rid of the deduction would cost middle-class homeowners money, Sheinkopf said. Off the top of his head, he sketched out a possible TV ad:, A bold economic plan to protect America's future, he said. Get rid of deductions for the rich. ... Tax deduction for homeownership takes millions of dollars away from people in need, reduces services, takes money away from the places we need to spend it. From education. From health care. For our children, for our future ... reform the tax system., You'll note the ad doesn't appeal to logic. It doesn't ask people to give up anything valuable. It says: Soak the other guy., Alfano said the ad shouldn't get bogged down in the details. Because once you give specifics, your opponent can use them against you. Sell images, not specifics., I see a horse, she said. I see a song., One thing you should never see in any political ad, according to Alfano: an economist., One consultant's vision for our political ad: I see a horse.
The development firm Panoramic Interests is building about two dozen micro-apartments in San Francisco. The company is poised to offer even smaller units if the city approves a proposed new minimum size of 220 square feet., In many large cities, like Dallas, Phoenix and even parts of Chicago, $800 a month is enough for a clean one-bedroom apartment, decked out with a living room, washer and dryer and maybe even a pool, in a larger complex., But if you want to live alone in San Francisco, getting those amenities at that price is practically a pipe dream. With the region's resurgent high-tech industries luring many well-educated, well-paid workers to the Bay Area, the average rent for a studio apartment in the city now runs around $2,000., The San Francisco Board of Supervisors is considering a proposal that seeks to address that. A proposed change to the building code would reduce the minimum allowed size for a studio to just 220 square feet. That includes the bathroom, kitchen and closet leaving a living area about the size of a cruise-ship cabin., While that may sound like a tight squeeze, supporters of these micro-apartments say they would provide a much-needed option for the pricey and densely packed Bay Area., Two Bedrooms, Four Roomies, Andy Huang, 31, moved to San Francisco from New York this summer. He has a good job in the tech field, but he's living with three roommates in a two-bedroom apartment., One roommate, Leo, lives in what was probably once a pantry. The other two roommates occupy the unit's actual bedrooms., For $800 a month, Huang lives in what was once the living room. His clothes hang on a set of parallel bars in the corner. Contact lens cases, deodorant and other toiletries adorn the fireplace mantel., Spaces must serve double duty in micro-units like the dining table above that converts into a Murphy bed., Spaces must serve double duty in micro-units like the dining table above that converts into a Murphy bed., As you can see, there's no closet, Huang says and laughs. And there's no sofa or desk, either., Yeah, this is definitely not for everyone, Huang says. People would be frustrated by the fact that this room has no closet. There's four guys sharing a bathroom., City Supervisor Scott Wiener authored the micro-apartment proposal for people in Huang's situation., We have a housing affordability crisis in San Francisco, Wiener says. Rents are through the roof., Wiener says he wants to help people who would prefer their own space but can't afford the city's sky-high rents., And if we can give them an option that's smaller for [$1,200, $1,400 or $1,500], that's a good thing, he says., Shoebox apartments are commonplace in large international cities like Tokyo and Paris. Berkeley, Calif.-based architect Patrick Kennedy points to other U.S. cities like Boston that are trying micro-units on for size. New York recently launched a pilot program to test tiny living designs., Kennedy is convinced that the smaller spaces will soon catch on in San Francisco, too., He shows off one of about two dozen apartments his firm, Panoramic Interests, is building near downtown. The unit is 290 square feet just a tad over the current smallest legal size in San Francisco. But he says he could easily go smaller if the micro-unit ordinance is approved when it goes up for a vote in November., 'Like The Smart Car', Kennedy is also a master at packing a lot into small spaces evident as he gestures around the apartment., We have a window seat with a table that goes up over there in the corner, he explains. We have a dining room table that converts to a Murphy bed over here. We're going to have a love seat there., Even a dishwasher is packed into the tiny kitchen., Kennedy compares the apartments to tiny cars. It's like the Volkswagen or the Fiat Cinque Terre ... or the Smart car, he says. People are skeptical when it's first introduced, but soon it's embraced., But while there may be demand for supersmall units in big cities, the plan does have its critics. Some worry that San Francisco could go the way of Singapore if the tiny units catch on. That Asian megacity is now limiting micro-unit construction to reduce overcrowding.
Tina Brown, editor-in-chief of Newsweek, announced Thursday that the 80-year-old newsmagazine will publish its final print edition on Dec. 31 and shift to an all-digital format in early 2013., Tina Brown, editor-in-chief of Newsweek, announced Thursday that the 80-year-old newsmagazine will publish its final print edition on Dec. 31 and shift to an all-digital format in early 2013., Newsweek editor Tina Brown announced Thursday she would embrace a fully digital future as she revealed that the magazine's final print edition would be published at the end of the year., Her announcement was a bow to gravity, as her unique blend of buzz and brio proved incapable of counteracting Newsweek's plummeting circulation and advertising amid an accelerating news cycle. Brown said there would be an unspecified number of layoffs as well., Instead, a new digital publication called Newsweek Global would emerge that would be really focused on a highly mobile, opinion leading and worldwide audience, said Baba Shetty, the new CEO of Newsweek and its sister website, the Daily Beast., He said those elite readers in Belfast, Northern Ireland; Mumbai, India; or San Francisco have more in common than a broad subscriber base in the U.S., But the digital-only play will require significant layoffs from the magazine that's already leaner than it once was. It's also not yet clear how Newsweek Global will retool to draw in paying digital subscribers to support it., Once A Pillar Of The Press, In the 1980s and 1990s, Brown reinvigorated Vanity Fair and then the New Yorker to a significant degree of acclaim. More recently, the late billionaire inventor Sidney Harman brought her in to do the same after he bought Newsweek for a dollar from the Washington Post Co. After Harman's death, it was taken over by his partner, IAC's Barry Diller, who founded the Daily Beast with Brown. Unlike Harman, Diller has signaled he will not tolerate endless losses., We're in a very difficult reality for printed products no doubt. The expenses for manufacturing are just remarkable, said Josh Tyrangiel, editor of Bloomberg Businessweek. Any process that begins with 'Go up a mountain and find a tree' is not a particularly efficient process., Efficiency didn't matter until recent years. Newsweek lagged behind Time magazine, but both flourished as pillars of the establishment press., I think it's hard for people who are entering journalism now to recognize a) how influential these magazines were and b) how flush with cash they were, just by virtue of being who they were, said Matthew Cooper, a former Newsweek deputy Washington bureau chief who is now editor of National Journal Daily. I think people really waited on Sunday and Monday to see what would be on the cover of Newsweek and Time., Each had millions of readers in living rooms, corporate boardrooms and, of course, dentists' waiting rooms, helping to reflect and shape the nation's political developments and cultural sensibilities., Cooper said Bruce Springsteen was, in part, propelled to stardom the week in 1975 when both magazines ran cover stories on his album Born to Run., Newsweek Under Tina Brown, Newsweek always had a slyness, an Avis to Time magazine's Hertz. But Cooper and others argue that Brown's particular brand of brio failed the title., It's a fine line between playful and seriousness, Cooper said. I think the older Newsweek balanced that pretty well. I don't think the current rendition did., One cover called President Obama the first gay president. Another one, trumpeting an article by the conservative scholar Niall Ferguson, shouted: Hit the Road, Barack. A third was titled Muslim Rage, suggesting an entire religion's hostility to the West and especially the U.S. That one prompted widespread derision on Twitter and a sense that Newsweek under Brown had not figured out a core mission other than the creation of controversy., Tyrangiel said he admires Brown and doesn't envy her challenge. He left his old job as deputy editor at Time magazine to lead Businessweek, which was itself bought for a dollar (and the assumption of significant debt) by another billionaire-led company, Bloomberg LLP. But after deep staff cuts, Tyrangiel has led a much-heralded reinvention and a greater emphasis on digital contribution to Bloomberg News., The people who are still printing and still printing successfully have found a way to own a corner of the information market. It's a real challenge to be a general interest publication in this day and age, Tyrangiel said. Your readers are willing to pay for indispensible information. You have to own some piece of the market. The broader you go, the harder the challenge., And if global sophisticates are the intended subscribers, the question is why pay for a tablet edition of Newsweek and not instead say the Economist or the New Yorker or the Wall Street Journal or consume any of a thousand blogs or news sites that do not charge?, Shetty, the Newsweek/Daily Beast's CEO, says the company is not simply shedding costs of publishing, producing and distributing a weekly magazine. The move, he says, does not represent a retreat, but an advance into a new news age demanded by its readers., We felt that this was a time to make a commitment, Shetty said Thursday. The Newsweek brand is something that we fundamentally believe in but the form factor that we believe in it is digital not a printed, paper-based magazine.
If you're one of those people who vigilantly checks the ingredient list of the things you buy at the grocery store, you may have already seen this: Some food products now contain something called evaporated cane juice. It can be found in yogurt, fruit juices and lemonades., So what exactly is evaporated cane juice? Well, it depends on whom you ask. We spoke with a few folks outside our local grocery store, and many of them were confused. Take a listen:, A sugar company that makes evaporated cane juice, Florida Crystals, describes it as a natural sweetener with dark golden hues and a sweet sugarcane flavor., But another sugar company that doesn't make the product says it's just another name for sugar., All sugar is evaporated cane juice, Judy Sanchez, a spokesperson for the U.S. Sugar Corp., says. They just use that for a natural-sounding name for a product., Sanchez says all sugar is made by taking the liquid of the sugarcane plant, evaporating it and then putting it in a centrifuge to separate the gooey molasses from the crystallized sucrose. She says the only difference between evaporated cane juice and common white sugar is that the white sugar is stripped of all traces of molasses, while evaporated cane juice still has some little flecks of molasses that give it a darker caramel color., It's got negligible amounts of nutrients or anything like that. Healthwise it's not any better or worse for you, Sanchez says., If you look very closely, you'll see evaporated cane juice in the ingredients list on this yogurt. A California woman is suing the Chobani yogurt company over its use of the term., If you look very closely, you'll see evaporated cane juice in the ingredients list on this yogurt. A California woman is suing the Chobani yogurt company over its use of the term., While the name thing may sound like mere semantics, the stakes for the food industry are actually pretty high., FDA issued a guidance three years ago suggesting that manufacturers shouldn't use the term evaporated cane juice to describe sweeteners made from sugar cane syrup because the term hides the fact that ultimately it's sugar. Of course, because it's a guidance, and a draft one at that, the agency technically can't enforce it., Earlier this year, northern Californian Katie Kane sued the yogurt company Chobani in federal court, claiming its use of the term evaporated cane juice misled her into buying the company's Greek yogurt. Her class-action suit is seeking unspecified damages, and she relies heavily on FDA's guidance in her argument., We contacted Chobani. It wouldn't comment on why it uses the term evaporated cane juice instead of sugar. But a Chobani spokesperson told The Salt in an email that its labels are not misleading and that it plans to vigorously defend itself against Kane's charges., While some folks appear to be distancing themselves from the name sugar, corn refiners have been on a longstanding quest to put on the sugar mantle. Alas, for them, the FDA ruled earlier this year that the makers of high fructose corn syrup could not change the name of their product to corn sugar., Either way, it might be best to keep in mind a version of the famous Shakespeare line: Sugar by any other name tastes just as sweet and has just as many calories.
Google CEO Larry Page. What's he going to say now?, Google CEO Larry Page. What's he going to say now?, Oops., Google's stock fell like an Austrian skydiver this afternoon after the Securities and Exchange Commission posted the company's third-quarter earnings news several hours before it was supposed to be on the Web. Somebody apparently screwed up and hit publish even though the news was supposed to be held until after the stock markets close in New York at 4 p.m. ET., The search engine giant's shares were trading around $687 each down about 9 percent before trading was temporarily halted just before 1:30 p.m. ET., The news in the release isn't so great. Google's profit declined 20% as total costs jumped and advertising prices continued to slide, as The Wall Street Journal reports., And then there's this embarrassing issue: An ALL CAPS note at the top of the release says PENDING LARRY QUOTE. Larry, of course, is Google CEO Larry Page. The line about him has already inspired creation of @pendinglarry on Twitter, which is having much fun with what it is Page might be meaning to say, including:, GOOG data by YCharts, &mdash; To be fair, we released our earnings yesterday afternoon on Google Plus., &mdash; Wanted to get it out there before Kara Swisher 'scooped' us. How's it feel now, Kara?!, &mdash; Man, our privacy was WAY violated today., Update at 3 p.m. ET. One More From @pendinglarry:, &mdash; You guys, that SEC filing was a beta release.
The number of first-time claims for jobless benefits rose by 46,000 last week, to 388,000, the Employment and Training Administration says., The previous week's total 342,000 was the fewest since early 2008. The increase last week put claims back into the range where they've been stuck for a year, between 350,000 and 400,000., At least a major part of the jump would be a correction from the prior week, Tom Simons, an economist at Jefferies Group Inc. in New York, tells Bloomberg News. We're seeing very gradual improvement in the labor market. The economy is just plodding along at the moment., According to Reuters:, A Labor Department official said it appeared that state-level administrative issues were distorting the data. The government adjusts its readings for claims to take into account regular seasonal swings. Claims usually increase at the beginning of a quarter, but one state appears to be following a different pattern than normal in reporting its claims, which led to the wild fluctuations over the last couple of weeks, the official said., Watch for the news of the increase to be a campaign trail topic later today. After previous reports signalling strengthening in the labor market, some conservatives questioned whether the statistics were being skewed.
Say goodbye., Say goodbye., Saying that we have reached a tipping point at which we can most efficiently and effectively reach our readers in all-digital format, editor Tina Brown announced this morning that Newsweek's Dec. 31 issue will be its last print edition., Going forward, she said:, Newsweek will expand its rapidly growing tablet and online presence, as well as its successful global partnerships and events business., Newsweek Global, as the all-digital publication will be named, will be a single, worldwide edition targeted for a highly mobile, opinion-leading audience who want to learn about world events in a sophisticated context. Newsweek Global will be supported by paid subscription and will be available through e-readers for both tablet and the Web, with select content available on The Daily Beast., Brown closes by saying:, Exiting print is an extremely difficult moment for all of us who love the romance of print and the unique weekly camaraderie of those hectic hours before the close on Friday night. But as we head for the 80th anniversary of Newsweek next year we must sustain the journalism that gives the magazine its purposeand embrace the all-digital future., It was just two years ago that entrepreneur Sidney Harman bought Newsweek from The Washington Post Co. at effectively no cost. It was then merged with The Daily Beast. As news analyst James Fallows told NPR at the time, news magazines were invented to fill a need that no longer exists to try to connect readers across the country who didn't have access to good, daily newspapers., Poynter.org notes that according to Newsweek's most recent publisher's statement filed with the Audit Bureau of Circulations, the company's print circulation has dropped 51 percent since 2007., Meanwhile, according to Brown, The Daily Beast now attracts more than 15 million unique visitors a month, a 70 percent increase in the past year alone.
The mortgage is going to cost more than you thought., The mortgage is going to cost more than you thought., Watching a presidential campaign, it's easy to think that the nation is deeply divided over how to fix the economy. But when you talk to economists, it turns out they agree on an enormous number of issues., So we brought together five economists from across the political spectrum and had them create their dream presidential candidate. Over the next few days, we'll have a series of stories on our economists' dream candidate. We start this morning with some changes to the tax code., Every single one of our economists said a dream candidate would kill off a giant perk that millions of Americans love and enjoy: the mortgage-interest tax deduction., If you pay a mortgage on your home, you can write off the interest you pay on that loan. And if you get this benefit, it seems great. A little help from the government to live the American dream of homeownership., But to an economist, a tax break is the same as the government writing you a check., It just makes no sense that if we have Bill Gates or some very wealthy person, we're subsidizing them to get a very expensive home, said Dean Baker, of the Center for Economic and Policy Research., So because rich people receive a larger subsidy, the price of houses increases so much it actually makes it less affordable for the poorer people, said Luigi Zingales, of the University of Chicago Booth School of Business., This deduction costs the U.S. government about $100 billion a year. And to understand why the government keeps the deduction in place, imagine what a presidential candidate would sound like if he promised to eliminate it:, When I'm elected president, I have a special plan for the middle class: All of you Americans who own your own homes, I promise to raise your tax bill by thousands of dollars a year., Also on the chopping block: the rule that allows employee health benefits to go untaxed. As with the mortgage-interest deduction, the rule distorts markets and disproportionately favors the well-off, who pay higher tax rates and tend to have better health care plans., So far, our economists' dream candidate is not doing so well with the middle class. A lot of people would probably pay more taxes., I asked our panel: Aren't there some taxes that we can cut or get rid of? They all agreed: Get rid of the corporate tax!, Another hard sell. Right now, President Obama and Mitt Romney are advocating lower corporate taxes, but nothing?, It may sound unfair. But two of the most liberal economists on our panel agreed., The corporate income tax makes no sense whatsoever, said Robert Frank, a professor at Cornell. We don't want to prevent Microsoft and General Motors ... from investing more and improving their product line, Baker said. That's a good thing in my view., Our economists said if you want to tax rich people as public policy, then tax rich people tax the people who own corporations. But taxing the corporation itself is taxing the thing that really does create jobs., The five economists on our panel are: Dean Baker, Katherine Baicker, Robert Frank, Russ Roberts and Luigi Zingales. We'll have more from them later today. For a response from Dean Baker, see this post. For our complete platform, see this post.
A cornerstone at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in Manhattan., A cornerstone at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York in Manhattan., Quazi Mohammad Rezwanul Ahsan Nafis, 21, was arrested this morning in downtown Manhattan after he allegedly attempted to detonate what he believed to be a 1,000-pound bomb at the New York Federal Reserve Bank on Liberty Street in lower Manhattan's financial district, the FBI confirms an email just sent to reporters., It adds that:, The arrest of Nafis was the culmination of an undercover operation during which he was closely monitored by the FBI New York Field Office's Joint Terrorism Task Force (JTTF). The explosives that he allegedly sought and attempted to use had been rendered inoperable by law enforcement and posed no threat to the public. ..., The defendant faces charges of attempting to use a weapon of mass destruction and attempting to provide material support to al-Qaida. ..., According to the criminal complaint filed today in the Eastern District of New York, defendant Nafis, a Bangladeshi national, traveled to the United States in January 2012 for the purpose of conducting a terrorist attack on U.S. soil. Nafis, who reported having overseas connections to al-Qaida, attempted to recruit individuals to form a terrorist cell inside the United States. Nafis also actively sought out al-Qaida contacts within the United States to assist him in carrying out an attack. Unbeknownst to Nafis, one of the individuals he attempted to recruit was actually a source for the FBI. Through the investigation, FBI agents and NYPD detectives working with the JTTF were able to closely monitor Nafis as he attempted to implement his plan., The New York Post, which got word of the arrest before it was announced, reports being told by sources that this morning, after parking [a] van, [the suspect] went to the Millennium Hotel near the World Trade Center, where he called the cell phone in the van. It did not explode, and he was arrested by federal agents. The terrorist was the only one arrested, sources said., Update at 5:45 p.m. ET. Case Differs From Some Others:, This case, NPR's Dina Temple-Raston reports, appears to be different from other undercover operations the FBI has conducted recently. The criminal complaint indicates that the motivation for an attack came from Nafis and that he came to the U.S. with an attack in mind. He was not first identified because he was boasting about jihad in an Internet chat room and then picked up by undercover agents. Also: Nafis allegedly claimed to have a connection to al-Qaida though it is unclear if that is true., Update at 4 p.m. ET. More From The FBI., The agency has been tweeting about this investigation. It just posted that:, Nafis also referred to 'beloved Sheikh Osama bin Laden' to justify killing of women and children.
The percentage of Americans working in manufacturing fell under President Reagan. It also fell under Presidents Bush, Clinton, Bush and Obama (respectively)., Which is to say, the decline of manufacturing jobs in the U.S. economy is not about who is president or what his policies are. It's the result of long-running, irreversible, historical factors (read: technology and globalization)., But when the subject of jobs came up last night, President Obama and former Gov. Romney talked a lot about manufacturing. There are gauzy, nostalgic reasons for this. In the decades after the second world war, high school dropouts could walk onto factory floors all around America and find decent, secure middle-class jobs., By the early '70s, a a quarter of American workers worked in manufacturing. But in the decades that followed, technological improvements allowed manufacturers to produce more stuff with fewer workers. And the workers factories did need had to be more highly skilled. They were needed not for their brawn, but for their ability to operate and maintain high-tech equipment., Today, only 9 percent of Americans work in manufacturing. That's not nothing. And, in fact, the sector has been adding jobs recently after getting hammered during the recession., But the long-run picture is clear. Manufacturing jobs will never again hold the central place in our economy that they once did. At the same time lots of other sectors health care, professional services will continue to become more important, and will continue to offer good, middle-class jobs. But those jobs will not, for the most part, be open to high school dropouts., Education, not manufacturing, is the key to long-term job growth in America. As Cristina Romer, the former chairwoman of Obama's Council of Economic Advisers has written:, There are sectors where workers with good educations could earn good wages if the economy were healthy. Why focus on manufacturing to create such jobs? Instead, government could make it easier for workers to get the education needed for high-skilled jobs in many fields and encourage business formation wherever entrepreneurs see a promising opportunity. ..., AS an economic historian, I appreciate what manufacturing has contributed to the United States. It was the engine of growth that allowed us to win two world wars and provided millions of families with a ticket to the middle class. But public policy needs to go beyond sentiment and history. ... So far, a persuasive case for a manufacturing policy remains to be made ...
Construction worker Jim Castellano walks out of a Toll Brothers Inc. home he is working on in Boca Raton, Florida., Construction worker Jim Castellano walks out of a Toll Brothers Inc. home he is working on in Boca Raton, Florida., The rate at which builders began work on new homes surged to a four-year high, the Commerce Department said today., The AP reports that September clocked the fastest pace since July of 2008. The AP adds:, The Commerce Department says builders broke ground at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 872,000 in September. That's an increase of 15% from August., Applications for building permits, a sign of future construction, jumped nearly 12% to an annual rate of 894,000, also the highest since July 2008., The strength in September came from both single-family construction, which rose 11%, and apartments, which increased 25.1%., Bloomberg reports that this is a sign of recovery but the level of starts remains below the pre-recession peak, limiting how much the industry can boost the rate of expansion., Brian Jones, an economist who spoke to Bloomberg, said the housing market has turned... but we still have a long way to go. He also adds that an increase in housing starts brings an increase in jobs.
Today's announcement that Vikram Pandit had abruptly resigned as chief executive of banking giant Citigroup has left competitors, analysts and media pundits stunned and sputtering., This comes as a huge surprise, William George, a Goldman Sachs board member, said in an interview on CNBC., Fox Business reporter Charles Gasparino tweeted that he believes it was obvious Vikram Pandit was fired., Speculation is centering on a clash Pandit may have had with the board of directors over strategy and/or execution., Pandit himself told Bloomberg that the decision to quit was his own., In a memo to the staff, the new CEO, Michael Corbat, said he's going to study up over the the next several weeks to understand Citigroup's business and then these assessments will result in some changes., Citi employees are widely believed to have responded en masse by saying: Yikes!, George, in the CNBC interview, said that the making such a sudden change in leadership simply is not done at big, important banks., This is not the way boards do things, he said. Usually, a top management change is announced months before it takes effect, giving investors, customers and employees time to absorb and assess the news, he said., The announcement came one day after the company reported third-quarter earnings that, aside from some one-time items, were seen as very positive. High-speed stock traders jumped in as soon as markets opened today, sending the stock price a bit higher on heavy volume., Pandit, an Indian-born American, had been the CEO of Citigroup since December, 2007 a tough time to start. That was the month that the Great Recession officially began., From the start of his tenure, the stock price was down 89 percent.
An audience member holds up his hand at a Mitt Romney town hall meeting in Dayton, Ohio, in March. Audience members will be allowed to ask questions at the second presidential debate, being held Tuesday night in Hempstead, N.Y., An audience member holds up his hand at a Mitt Romney town hall meeting in Dayton, Ohio, in March. Audience members will be allowed to ask questions at the second presidential debate, being held Tuesday night in Hempstead, N.Y., As this election year began, political pundits insisted the No. 1 issue would be the economy. They expected the candidates to offer voters detailed plans for encouraging job growth., Now, with the election just three weeks away, many Americans are still scratching their heads, wondering what exactly President Obama and former Gov. Mitt Romney would do to improve the economy., During the first presidential debate, the moderator did little to nail down details on the topics that matter most to average people, such as home prices, gasoline, wages, exports and jobs. At tonight's televised town hall meeting at Hofstra University in Hempstead, N.Y., at least a few voters will have a chance to ask questions to clarify differences between the candidates on real economy issues., Here are five topics that many Americans would like to hear more about:, Helping the housing sector, The housing sector has been in a depression since 2007. In recent months, some indicators have been turning up, but construction spending is still mostly moving sideways, and home prices generally remain far below 2006 levels., Romney has not said much about foreclosures and the home-price crash, except in a Las Vegas Review-Journal interview when he said: Let it run its course and hit the bottom., Obama disagreed, saying in his State of the Union address in January that responsible homeowners shouldn't have to sit and wait for the housing market to hit bottom to get some relief. He has backed modest programs to slow foreclosures, such as the Home Affordable Modification Program (HAMP) and the Home Affordable Refinance Program (HARP)., Question No. 1: Given how long the housing crisis has dragged on, is there something more you and the Congress could be doing to help? Please be specific., Helping consumers cope with gas prices, This year, consumers have seen crazy swings in gasoline prices, with the average price per gallon shooting up from about $3.25 as the year began to $3.92 just three months later. Then the price fell again, rose again and now is back around $3.75., It's tough to set a household budget when you never know how much you're going to pay at the pump. Both candidates agree Americans are too dependent on oil from the Middle East, a region where political instability contributes to price volatility., The plan is to control more of our own energy, Obama says., I'm going to take advantage of our energy resources and get us energy independent, Romney says., Question No. 2: Every president since Jimmy Carter has been talking about making us energy independent. Is it just beyond the power of a president to do anything about gasoline prices, or do you have a plan that is different from all of those past presidents?, Helping households stay afloat, Food experts warn that grocery prices could be headed higher. Breakfast an important meal for children is already costing more, with retail prices going up for eggs, bacon, orange juice and milk., Meanwhile, wages are hardly growing at all. Lots of families already have cut back on their driving, cancelled newspapers and clipped coupons. But until they get raises, budgets are tight., Question No. 3: Is there anything a president can do to help get U.S. wages moving up again?, Helping factories by expanding exports, Both Obama and his Republican challenger say they want to boost U.S. exports. Selling more goods overseas certainly would be helpful to many U.S. factories., I want to export more products and outsource fewer jobs, Obama says., Where other nations are now competing, I want to make sure our goods can go throughout the world, Romney says., Question No. 4: You each have expressed support for trade pacts. But since a free-trade agreement with South Korea took effect March 15, imports from South Korea have been surging, far outstripping U.S. exports to that country. In fact, our trade deficit with South Korea is up nearly 25 percent so far this year. Why do you want more free-trade deals?, Helping workers by increasing job training, About 3.6 million jobs are open right now in this country. At the same time, about 12 million people are looking for work but getting turned down. Many employers say job seekers just don't have the right skills for the available openings., Both Obama and Romney say they want to fix that mismatch by upgrading workers' skills., I'm going to make sure we have the kind of training programs that give people the skills they need for the jobs of today, Romney says., I want to give more Americans the chance to get the skills that they need to compete, Obama says., Question No. 5: What's the difference between your plans? At a time when Congress must cut spending, how would each of you reduce the skills mismatch?, &mdash;, In the comments section below, please tell us what questions you would ask the candidates.
Vikram Pandit on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange on in June., Vikram Pandit on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange on in June., Vikram Pandit, the chief executive officer of Citigroup, has stepped down, the company's board announced today., The Board also announced it has unanimously elected Michael Corbat CEO and a director of the Board, Citigroup said in a statement. Mr. Corbat previously served as Citigroup's CEO of Europe, Middle East and Africa., Pandit's resignation was effective immediately. As Business Insider reports, the succession was rumored but shock resignations like this (especially resigning that day) are just not usually done, and don't inspire investor confidence., The New York Times reports:, The surprising move by Mr. Pandit comes just one day after the firm reported stronger-than-expected third-quarter earnings. Under Mr. Pandit's tenure, which began shortly before the financial crisis of 2008, Citi struggled through enormous market upheaval and needed several rescue lines from the government., But it has slowly recovered, in large by shedding big portions of its businesses. Among them is Smith Barney, the brokerage operation that is being absorbed by Morgan Stanley., In a statement, Pandit said he was leaving Citigroup well-positioned for continued profitability and growth., He added:, Given the progress we have made in the last few years, I have concluded that now is the right time for someone else to take the helm at Citigroup. I could not be leaving the Company in better hands. Mike is the right person to tackle the difficult challenges ahead, with a 29-year record of achievement and leadership at this Company. I will truly miss the wonderful people throughout this organization. But I know that together with Mike they will continue to build on the progress we have made., Update at 9:39 a.m. ET. COO Also Resigns: , The Wall Street Journal reports that in light of Pandit's resignation, Chief Operating Officer John P. Havens also submitted his resignation. , The Journal adds:, A senior Citigroup banker in Asia said the news came as a complete surprise. He said executives in Asia, Citigroup's fastest-growing regions, were blindsided by the news in part because they expected a well-orchestrated succession plan to be in place before Mr. Pandit resigned., Another executive at the bank said there was no inkling that Mr. Pandit, who was in the region last month, was thinking of resigning. The perception in Asia, the banker said, was he was getting settled in his post-crisis role of trying to boost the bank's growth.
Veterans applaud at an Oct. 8 campaign event in Swanton, Ohio, for Republican vice presidential candidate Paul Ryan. Health care and unemployment are among veterans' chief concerns this election season, and both the Obama and the Romney campaigns have offered solutions., Veterans applaud at an Oct. 8 campaign event in Swanton, Ohio, for Republican vice presidential candidate Paul Ryan. Health care and unemployment are among veterans' chief concerns this election season, and both the Obama and the Romney campaigns have offered solutions., Military veterans across the country have a whole range of concerns this election season, from the high rate of suicide to special challenges for female vets. But like everyone else, they're especially concerned with health care and jobs., The nation's obligations to some 2 million veterans of Iraq and Afghanistan pose a challenge for the next commander in chief. Unemployment for post-Sept. 11 vets is about 2 percentage points worse than the national average, and veterans want solutions., In Orange Park, Fla., south of Jacksonville, a town built around Navy and Air Force bases, the VFW hall is smoky and loud with conversation among veterans from many different wars., I was with the Air Force Reserves, says Elisa Rosemond, and my question is how you're going to help the troops coming home, active and reserve, find a job that they can support their families with?, Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney addressed that issue in a speech to the American Legion in August: To make it easier for veterans to find employment in skilled trades, he said, I will work with the states to create a common credentialing and licensing standard, and encourage organizations to recognize and grant credit for military training., President Obama said something similar at Fort Bliss, an Army base in Texas: If you've been a medic in theater, you shouldn't have to start at nursing 101 if you decide you want to go into the medical profession here in the United States., In the final weeks before the 2012 election, NPR explores the major issues facing the next president of the United States., That's one issue Obama and Romney agree on: making it easier for vets to get credentials. There are other job initiatives first lady Michelle Obama leads an effort to push companies to hire vets. And Romney says he will keep a larger military, retaining more people in the service and not out in the tough job market., Health care and benefits and the performance of the Department of Veterans Affairs are the other big issues for veterans., At the Orange Park VFW, retired Air Force Senior Master Sgt. Robert LeLacheur wanted to know, What can be done to alleviate the backlog of cases that are awaiting decisions on benefits?, Mike Breen, a combat veteran of Iraq and Afghanistan whom the Obama campaign recommended to speak on the issue, says the backlog is already being reduced and that improvements will continue., We saw the largest increase in VA funding in 30 years that's why we're asking for more increases, that's why we're asking to automate a paper-and-pencil system and move that to computers, so he can get the benefits he's earned, Breen says. Because he deserves to have those benefits, and he deserves to have them quickly., The problem is that once a vet puts in a claim for a medical benefit, it can take months or years to get it taken care of. The VA is trying to get the average wait time down to four months, but it's not even meeting that goal., Romney also supports moving to a paperless system, as his adviser Anthony Principi, a former secretary of the VA, explains: We need to put things on the computer. We need to employ new technologies developed in the private sector, work hand in glove with the private sector to bring those solutions to the government, Principi says. So, rather than deciding three claims a day or four claims a day, we can double that number with the right technology., The campaigns aren't that far apart on what to do for veterans. Both candidates agree on the need and even on some of the solutions. But there's one more similarity: Veterans advocates say neither candidate has offered enough in the way of specifics.
Kitsy Roberts and Janko Williams have traded a rent payment for a mortgage. The Seattle couple is planning to put a lot of sweat equity into their fixer-upper., Kitsy Roberts and Janko Williams have traded a rent payment for a mortgage. The Seattle couple is planning to put a lot of sweat equity into their fixer-upper., In many American communities, buying a home is now less expensive than renting. And with the economics tilting in favor of homeownership, many first-time buyers are jumping into the market., After eight years of renting, Kitsy Roberts and her husband, Janko Williams, are practically giddy about their new Seattle home. And like proud parents, they are eager to show it off, from its historic details to its fresh paint., The living room of their 1920s bungalow in the city's Central District features a lovely Craftsman-style fireplace and high ceilings. But the house also came adorned with chartreuse carpeting and kitchen cabinets of faux pink marble., Roberts and Williams moved in about a month ago; they've been feverishly fixing and renovating ever since. They're scraping away layers and layers of paint and wallpaper, filling in cracks and replastering. Pointing to the old and not very efficient windows, Roberts sighs and says, We will probably need to replace these at some point., People buy homes, especially first homes, for lots of reasons. They want more space, a backyard, a sense of privacy and security., And until the housing bubble burst, homeownership was widely viewed as a good investment., Today, buying a house may once again look like a sound financial option, at least in many parts of the country where markets have stabilized, mortgage interest rates are extremely low, and rents are moving sharply higher., If you are in a stable place and you have the financial ability ... it's kind of the perfect time to purchase a home, says Kim Colaprete, part of Team Diva real estate at Coldwell Banker Bain. She helped Roberts and Williams buy their house., The couple both of them are in their early 30s had been thinking about taking the plunge into homeownership but hadn't gotten serious. Then they watched as a house in their favorite neighborhood sold in just a couple of days and for substantially more than the asking price., I mean, that was sort of it that one house, Roberts says., We're going to miss our chance, Williams recalls thinking. They set out to find a real estate agent, and a house of their own., Their new home cost $350,000. Their monthly payment is $1,680, including taxes and insurance. That's about $250 more than their rent. But they'll get some of that back when they deduct the mortgage interest on their tax return., It beats paying rent, Roberts says. You're paying for a roof over your head. But after that, you're paying into nothing., Colaprete says she hears the same thing from most of her first-time buyers: They are sick of paying rent, especially since rents have been rising., They say, 'This is ridiculous, I can buy something with an interest rate of 3.35, or 3.5 [percent]. Why am I paying someone else to have an investment when I can have my own investment?' , Stan Humphries, the chief economist for Zillow, an online source of real estate and related data, says, The overwhelming factor in any buy/rent consideration is the time horizon itself: How long are you going to be in that house?, If you are going to be in a house for 20 years, you want to buy the house, he says. And conversely, if you're only going to be in the house for one year, you're going to want to rent that house, because you won't be able to make up for the transactional cost., Those transaction costs such as closing costs and commissions can be thousands of dollars., Historically, Humphries says, the so-called break-even point when buying becomes a better financial proposition than renting has been about four to five years in many markets. Today, he says, in lots of places it's less than three years., Still, there are challenges for many would-be homebuyers. Obtaining a loan can be difficult. And in places like Seattle, there's a shortage of homes on the market so there isn't much to choose from., But Kitsy Roberts found what she was looking for: a cute house in the right neighborhood, for the right price., This is pretty neat, she says. It's all ours.
This is Willow's new house., This is Willow's new house., Willow Tufano became a homeowner earlier this year. This was newsworthy because Willow was 14 years old. She raised money to buy the house by selling stuff on Craigslist., I spoke to Willow again last week and got an update. She's 15 now, and her life over the past few months was sort of surreal. She got caught up in two dramas: America's housing market and America's media circus., The housing market drama is in some ways more straightforward. The people renting her house recently left in the middle of the night and skipped out on the rent. She's trying to find new tenants., And, more significantly, she just bought another house near her home in Port Charlotte, Fla. This one two bedrooms, one bath cost $17,500. (The first one, which she split with her mom, cost $12,000, down from a value of roughly $100,000 at the peak of the boom.), I wasn't surprised that she bought a second house. She was clearly a savvy, ambitious kid. What struck me was how much Willow herself had changed., When I talked to her this spring, she didn't think about herself as remarkable in any way. But after our story aired, she became a minor celebrity. She went on Ellen. And Ellen DeGeneres kept telling Willow what an amazing kid she is., Everyone started calling, Willow says. Good Morning America, Anderson Cooper, some show from Korea. I thought, 'Oh my goodness.' , Willow was invited to give a talk at a college in Alabama. She was nervous; hundreds of people would be staring at her., So when she flew to Alabama with her mom, Willow wore her bright yellow Pikachu costume. It's basically like Big Bird marching through a bunch of Southern airports. Everyone was staring which was the whole point., Willow in her Pikachu costume., Walking through three big airports and having so many people stare, I felt pretty confident I could speak in front of 200 people and be OK, she says., Willow's mom says it was that weird stunt and then going on to nail the Alabama lecture that cemented a change in Willow. She was no longer an unassuming kid with a weird hobby. Everything around her was telling her she was interesting. And she was starting to believe it. She was star material., The inevitable next step: Willow decided she should have her own reality TV show., We are in the process of pitching a sizzle reel, she says. Clips of me. Little highlights., Willow says her producers (she has producers now) think her story has tremendous commercial appeal the life of a teenage real estate mogul. Willow has fully cast herself into that role., When Willow's mom unilaterally lowered the rent on her first house to try to attract new tenants, Willow got annoyed. I said, 'Did you even ask me if I like those people? Or if I wanted to lower the rent to $650? I don't think so.' , When I met Willow in March, she had no friends. But a reality TV star has friends. Now Willow has successfully collected a bunch., You have to scout and see who really is there for you, she says. Some people ... try and mooch money off of me. ... I would totally teach them how to make money. They don't even wanna make an effort., I don't want to be fake, she says. I'm going to be one of those people that loves their fans. If I have any.
A life well-worth noting has caught the attention of obituary writers:, &mdash; Andrew F. Brimmer, a Louisiana sharecropper's son who was the first black member of the Federal Reserve Board and who led efforts to to reverse the country's balance-of-payments deficit, died on Sunday in Washington. He was 86. (The New York Times), &mdash; In nominating Brimmer as a Fed governor on Feb. 26, 1966, [President] Johnson said, 'He is a man of wide professional experience and great personal integrity, a man of moderation whose brilliance is combined with a sense of fair play that I believe will enable him to serve with distinction.' The lead story in the next day's New York Times carried the headline, 'Johnson Appoints Negro Economist to Reserve Board.' (Bloomberg News), Andrew Brimmer in 1970, when he was a Federal Reserve Board governor., Andrew Brimmer in 1970, when he was a Federal Reserve Board governor., &mdash; Brimmer ... was the first chairman of the District of Columbia Financial Responsibility and Management Assistance Authority better known as the Control Board. He led the body through its earliest and most contentious period, when it was caught between the Congress that created it in 1995 expecting swift and sweeping changes, and local officials led by Mayor Marion Barry who swore to resist on most every occasion. (The Washington Post), &mdash; Brimmer was the longest-serving Tuskegee [University] board member when he announced his retirement in 2010. (The Associated Press), Brimmer, who was on the Fed from 1966 to 1974 and went on to have a long career as a private economist, corporate board director and member of various government commissions, was a guest on Tell Me More in 2009. He told host Michel Martin that:, I learned to read and write very early because my father taught me how to read and write. So I learned to read, to write, and to figure. I was good in arithmetic and then in mathematics, but above all, I learned how to think logically., I had very good teachers. Even in Louisiana, I had two teachers who were very good. One taught me literally how to read and write. I applied it. My father taught me the basics. But my English teacher taught me - in fact, she's the one who got me interested in journalism. The other one, the principle of the school himself, he had done his masters' degree in history. And so I learned to look at the record., But from then on, step by step, I was forcing it. I always had a professor, somebody who was interested in me. And I was flattered. They thought I was bright - brighter than most and that I caught on more quickly. So from then, it was just discipline and training. In other words, you have to do dichotomies, and anyone who's pursuing a profession has to be able to get the person's hands dirty. And that's what I did.
Black Friday 2011 in Manhattan: Retailers hope to see shoppers out again in force this holiday season. If confidence stays high, they may get their wish., Black Friday 2011 in Manhattan: Retailers hope to see shoppers out again in force this holiday season. If confidence stays high, they may get their wish., U.S. consumer sentiment unexpectedly rose to its highest in five years in October as consumers became more optimistic about the economy in a possible boost to President Obama's reelection hopes, Reuters reports., According to the wire service, the Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan's preliminary October reading on the overall index on consumer sentiment came in at 83.1, up from 78.3 the month before, and the highest since September 2007, the survey showed on Friday., The U.S. economy officially slid into recession in December 2007. It officially came out of that downturn in Spring 2009., Bloomberg News adds that rising stock and property values along with falling joblessness may keep giving Americans a psychological boost, brightening the household-spending outlook during the year-end holidays. Improving confidence may play a role in next month's election as Republican challenger Mitt Romney tries to make a case for unseating President Barack Obama, a Democrat., The confidence survey follows other hopeful economic indicators in the past week: a sharp drop in jobless claims, and a dip in the nation's unemployment rate.
Oyster fisherman Bren Smith on his boat, The Mookie. Smith decided to try his hand at seaweed farming, collaborating with ecology professor Charles Yarish., Oyster fisherman Bren Smith on his boat, The Mookie. Smith decided to try his hand at seaweed farming, collaborating with ecology professor Charles Yarish., A new kind of crop is being planted in the United States, and it doesn't require any land or fertilizer. Farming it improves the environment, and it can be used in a number of ways. So what is this miracle cash crop of the future?, It's seaweed., Charlie Yarish, professor of ecology and evolutionary biology at the University of Connecticut, loves seaweed. In nature, he says, when seaweed turns a rich chocolate color, that means the plant is picking up nitrogen, a process called nutrient bioextraction. And for Yarish, this nitrogen extraction is the most exciting aspect of seaweed farming. Many plants and animals cannot survive when there is too much nitrogen in the water, but seaweed is able to capture the nitrogen, as well as contaminants in the water., A United Nations report says that nearly 16 million tons of seaweed were farmed in 2008 most of it in Asia. Yarish helped a company called Ocean Approved start the United States' first open-water kelp farm in the Gulf of Maine in 2006, and the business is growing. Now, he's helping to create a seaweed farm off the coast of Connecticut., Bren Smith owns and runs the Thimble Island Oyster Company, off the coast of Branford, Conn. After his business was hit hard by Tropical Storm Irene last year, ruining about 80 percent of the shellfish crop, Smith started looking around for something more resilient to farm. That's when he found Yarish, who agreed to help set him up in the seaweed farming business., This fall, in the water above his shellfishing lines, he'll stretch a 150-foot line about a meter below the surface of the water. They'll be seeded with kelp spores grown in Yarish's lab., There's no barns, there's no tractors. This is what's so special about ocean farming. It's that it's got a small footprint and it's under the water. I mean, we're so lucky; I feel like I stumbled on this just great secret that we then can model and spread out to other places, Smith says., Kelp grows in the winter time, and by spring, Smith should have 9 to 12 feet of growth. He and Yarish are hoping to try another species in the summer. Because shellfishing is so heavily regulated, the waters near the Thimble Islands are clean, and the seaweed is safe to eat. And it will also help remove nitrogen from the water., The plan is to actually split it into a couple different experimental markets one for food, one for fertilizer, one for fish food. I'm [also] working with a skin care company in Connecticut, and then one for biofuel, Smith says. He's even hoping he can someday fuel his own boat with biofuel from the seaweed., Smith is most hopeful that seaweed will take off as a food, but here's the big question: Will Americans eat seaweed? If I can't figure out how [to] make this taste good, I'm going to lose a lot of money out here, he says., That's where chefs like David Santos come in. Santos has worked at some top restaurants in New Jersey and New York. He now runs a private supper club in the New York area, and is planning to open his own restaurant soon., Santos says the food world works in kind of a trickle-down way, starting with the fancy restaurants. If the big chefs don't use it, it will never catch. Like, it just won't, he says., But seaweed is a great ingredient, Santos says, and if chefs start having access to a fresh locally farmed product, they'll start using it. So if you're the cool guy using the fresh seaweed first, like, that's a big deal, he says., Santos says he's hoping to go to Bren Smith's Connecticut farm this spring with some of his chef friends to check it out for themselves. But he's also looking forward to creating some new seaweed dishes.
1 of 7, Here's an astonishing fact: Half of America's mushrooms are grown in one tiny corner of southeastern Pennsylvania, near the town of Kennett Square., But why? It's not as though this place has some special advantage of climate or soil, the kind of thing that led to strawberry fields in Watsonville, Calif., or peach orchards in Georgia. Mushrooms can grow indoors. They could come from anywhere., No, what turned Kennett Square into the Mushroom Capital of the World was nothing more than historical accident, combined with the presence of some very industrious Quakers, Italians and Mexicans., The story starts with the Quakers., Sometime around 1885, according to local lore, two Quaker flower growers from Kennett Square were bothered by wasted space under the carnation beds in their greenhouses, and they thought of growing mushrooms there. So they steamed off to Europe, where people were already farming mushrooms, and brought back some spores., They were Kennett Square's original mushroom farmers. A few Quakers or their descendants are still in the business today., They hired some Italians laid-off workers from nearby stone quarries to handle some of the hard physical labor. And then the Italians started their own farms. So did their sons and cousins. By the 1950s, there were hundreds of mushroom farmers in Chester County, and most were Italians., Many are still there (although there are fewer, but we'll get to that)., Chris Alonzo, president of Pietro Industries, one of the bigger mushroom companies, takes me on a little driving tour of the area. As we go, he points to the mushroom-growing rooms: clusters of drab, windowless, cinder-block buildings, all exactly the same size, each one built into the side of a hill. There's the D'Amico farm, he says. And up here on the right is the Basciani farm. And on the left here is Kenny Davis' farm. So we have farm after farm after farm., Like a big extended family, the mushroom farmers including Alonzo's father and grandfather would get together at the Kennett Square Inn or Sam's Sub Shop on State Street. They'd check their mushroom houses at 4 in the morning, and at 5 they'd be up there having coffee, sharing ideas, says Alonzo., That's part of the secret to this clan's success. They had to learn from each other, because there was almost nobody else doing this. Fungus farming is completely different from growing plants, like wheat or potatoes. There's something weird and magical about it., It starts with the most basic thing: the compost that feeds the fungi., It Takes A Lot Of Manure, Chris Alonzo takes me to a huge compost-making yard that supplies lots of nearby farms. It's 20 acres of steaming, reeking decomposition. There are mounds of cocoa shells from the Hershey chocolate factory, corn cobs, chicken manure, hay, horse manure., Mushrooms are finicky. They don't like just any kind of manure. We've tried others, pig and cow [manure], and that just does not seem to work, says Alonzo. But with horses, it works very well., Loads of this compost will refill long beds inside those climate-controlled cinder-block buildings across Chester County. Spores will get mixed in., The spores will germinate, and silently, in the darkness, a thick web of white threads mycelia will spread through the compost and a layer of peat moss on top., Finally, mushroom growers force the fungus to deliver its fruit. We drop the carbon dioxide level, we drop the temperature, we start to add water, says Jim Angelucci, general manager of Phillips Mushroom Farms., This apparently convinces the fungi that winter is coming. They panic and try to reproduce. They send up mushrooms, which in nature, would release spores., Angelucci shows me the result, and it's spectacular. The beds are covered with a mass of pure white, like bubbling foam: thousands of white button mushrooms. These are the mushrooms along with other strains of this same species, the brown and portobello mushrooms that account for the vast majority of all mushrooms that Americans eat., In this growing room, the harvest is under way. Angelucci says it has to happen quickly. A mushroom doubles in size every 24 hours, so it's imperative that they be harvested at the proper time., This is hand labor. For the past few decades, most of the workers in this growing room, and across the industry, have come from Mexico., It's hard work, and many workers earn only a little more than minimum wage., Putting Down Roots For Steady, Hard Work, But, says Noelia Scharon, it's still a step up from seasonal work in the fields. She's Puerto Rican and grew up in Chester County; she and her husband, who is Mexican, both used to work in the mushroom industry. My opinion more people came here for the mushrooms because they didn't have to be moving around. With strawberries and tomatoes, they had to be moving from state to state, she says. The mushroom [harvest] is all year round., Thousands of mushroom workers have remained in the area, even after they moved on from mushroom jobs. Scharon and three partners started an ice cream shop just up the street from Sam's Sub Shop., Their children are going to school, learning the language. They don't want to stay in the mushroom industry; they see how hard their parents worked, Scharon says., There's change and uncertainty, in fact, on all sides of the Kennett Square mushroom industry., Costs have been going up. Big farms are getting bigger, and smaller ones are folding. Only 60 farms survive in Chester County, but production continues to increase., Chris Alonzo says it used to be really helpful to have so many mushroom growers so close together. It made them all more efficient., But they're now so big, he says, that they're trucking in hay and horse bedding for compost production from farms and stables a hundred miles away. There's not nearly enough affordable housing for all the workers. It's making mushroom farming here more expensive. Maybe, he says, this mushroom capital of the world has actually become too big.
Wind turbines dwarf a church near Wilson, Kan. The White House wants to extend a federal wind energy credit, but the Romney campaign wants to let it expire., Wind turbines dwarf a church near Wilson, Kan. The White House wants to extend a federal wind energy credit, but the Romney campaign wants to let it expire., When Vice President Joe Biden and U.S. Rep Paul Ryan face off during their only debate, tens of millions of Americans will tune in to hear them defend their running mates' records., And that audience Thursday night also will hear lots of budget-related buzzwords, with meanings that may not be entirely clear. Those words are shorthand for policies that could have huge impacts on taxpayers and the annual $1 trillion budget deficit., Brushing up on terms of the debate can help voters better understand what's really being said on the stage at Centre College in Kentucky., Even though vice presidents have no constitutional duties other than to break ties in the Senate, they often serve as key presidential advisers. And frequently, they end up serving as president themselves., Consider the odds: The country has had 44 presidents; nine of them have suddenly taken the presidential oath of office following the death or resignation of a president. Another five former vice presidents have gone on to be elected president. In other words, nearly a third of all presidents have had resumes that included time served as a vice president., Both Biden and Ryan are considered possible future presidential candidates. Here are some words they likely will use in their debate., In a budget debate, loophole typically refers to gray areas in the tax code. The ambiguity can be used to escape the intent of the law, without technically breaking it. For example, several years ago, Congress offered a tax break that was intended to help small businesses invest in heavy vehicles to upgrade their transportation fleets. The legislation's goal was to strengthen small business. But many small-business owners used the law not to expand fleets but to get a tax credit to buy an SUV for their personal use. During campaigns, politicians often say they will close loopholes to boost government revenues without raising tax rates., Besides being the GOP vice presidential candidate, Paul Ryan is chairman of the House Budget Committee. In that role, he has been pushing a plan to reduce the federal deficit by cutting spending. His plan would not balance the budget until 2040, but would reduce annual shortfalls. The most controversial feature involves changing Medicare to offer older Americans a menu of subsidized private insurance plans. Talking about the Ryan budget is usually a way to call attention to the proposed changes in Medicare and reductions in safety-net programs, such as the one offering food stamps., Wind energy has become a booming business, but a federal production tax credit expires at the end of the year. The White House wants to extend it, and the Romney campaign wants to let it expire. The issue reflects the opposing views on energy production: The Obama ticket wants special help to encourage alternatives to fossil fuels while the Romney ticket wants to end renewable-energy subsidies and boost competition among all energy producers.
An auction sign in front of a Salem, Ore., home on Feb. 23., An auction sign in front of a Salem, Ore., home on Feb. 23., RealtyTrac, an online industry group that follows the foreclosure market, says the number of foreclosed properties nationally dropped dramatically in September, down by seven percent from August. And the firm says since September 2011, foreclosures are down 16 percent that's the lowest total since July 2007., As part of the foreclosure process, RealtyTrac says it counts everything from default notices to bank repossessions. The firm found significant drops in the number of foreclosures in Arizona, California, Georgia, Michigan and Texas., Unfortunately, the news is not as rosy as it seems. RealtyTrac Vice President Daren Blomquist warns new regions that haven't struggled as much with foreclosures in the past are now seeing a wave of problems:, Several states where the foreclosure flow was not so dammed up last year could see a roller-coaster pattern in foreclosure activity going forward because of recent legislation or court rulings that substantively change the rules to properly foreclose. A backlog of delayed foreclosures will likely build up in those states as lenders adjust to the new rules, with many of those delayed foreclosures eventually hitting down the road., The company sees trouble in states like Florida, Illinois, Ohio, New Jersey and New York. In Ohio, the Columbus Dispatch reports foreclosures rose 1.8 percent in September and, compared to one year ago, property foreclosures are up 9.8 percent., California is a promising picture of improvement. The state has frequently been at or near the top of the foreclosure list but is seeing a change for the better. Even though California remained one of the hardest hit property markets in September, foreclosure starts there are now 45 percent lower than what they were one year ago., However, fleshing out the mixed picture, the situation is now much worse in Florida. RealtyTrac finds foreclosure starts jumped there by 24 percent in September, compared to the same time last year. Florida now leads all states in the greatest number of properties in the foreclosure process. That's the first time that's happened since April 2005.
A Marine Corp F-35B Joint Strike Fighter lands at Patuxent Naval Air Station in Maryland in 2011. Analysts say that if mandatory Pentagon budget cuts are imposed next year, fewer new planes could ultimately be ordered., A Marine Corp F-35B Joint Strike Fighter lands at Patuxent Naval Air Station in Maryland in 2011. Analysts say that if mandatory Pentagon budget cuts are imposed next year, fewer new planes could ultimately be ordered., Unless Congress acts, the Defense Department faces some $55 billion in cuts after the first of the year. The cuts are part of what's known as sequestration automatic across the board spending cuts to both defense and nondefense government spending set in motion by last year's debt-ceiling fight., Salaries for uniformed personnel are the one major thing that's protected. Otherwise, it's about a 10 percent cut to everything from Pentagon civilian staff to the acquisition of multimillion-dollar aircraft, like the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter., Todd Harrison, a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, says the 2013 budget calls for buying 29 of these jets, made by defense contractor Lockheed Martin. Sequestration might cut that to 26, he says., So what would that mean to the people who work on the jet? Immediately, Harrison says, not much because the F-35s on the assembly line in January were ordered and paid for in past budgets., What it will affect is those additional planes that the military was going to order, says Harrison. So there'll be fewer planes coming into the assembly line., The more immediate effects would be on civilian Defense Department employees. Harrison says as many as 100,000 could face furlough if the sequester hits Jan. 2., In all, the defense cuts could result in more than 1 million job losses directly and indirectly, says Stephen Fuller, a professor at George Mason University, who has analyzed the potential economic fallout for a trade group., They cut across every location in the country, pretty much every community in every sector, he says., While many argue the Defense Department should trim its budget and reduce waste, Harrison says these cuts by law would be far from strategic., What sequestration mandates, and there's no flexibility on this under the law, is everything takes the same cut, he says. Whether it's a high-priority item or a low-priority item, there's nothing they can do to avoid that., He uses the example of a household budget. If you were forced to cut 10 percent, you might cancel cable and eat out less cut out the low-priority expenses., Your landlord, the power company and everyone else you owed money to wouldn't respond well if instead you cut 10 percent across the board and started paying less than you owed each month., Ultimately, Harrison says the Department of Defense could face fines for breaking contracts. That is, if Congress lets it happen.
JetBlue is hedging its bets on the presidential election., The New York-based airline says it plans to give more than 1,000 free flights to raffle entrants who back the losing candidate in the Nov. 6 contest between President Obama and Republican Mitt Romney., The company's promotion promises: If things don't go your way, don't worry. Here's your chance to get a free flight out of the country. It's a round-trip ticket, by the way., The airline also lets visitors to its website pick whom they want to win (although without ever using the words Obama or Romney). On Wednesday, its real-time results had the blue donkey at 54 percent and the red elephant at 46 percent., Using the presidential race as a marketing ploy is nothing new, as we've noted before. For instance, the convenience store 7-Eleven has been running its coffee cup poll since the 2000 election; it says a majority of coffee drinkers sided with the eventual election winner in all three races since., In a southern Minnesota town with a population of a little more than 16,000, the Hanisch Bakery &amp; Coffee Shop claims to be even more prescient when it comes to the president., The Hanisch Bakery in Red Wing has been serving political-themed cookies at least since the Ronald Reagan-Walter Mondale presidential race in 1984. This year's cookies are decorated with the names Obama (over blue icing) or Romney (over red icing)., And the bakery owner tells the Rochester Post-Bulletin the cookies are seven-for-seven, having mirrored election results in every presidential race since the Republican Reagan crushed the Democrat Mondale (the Minnesotan who won his home state, the District of Columbia and nothing else) in that 1984 contest.
If the airbag in your car was replaced sometime in the past three years, and it wasn't done at an auto shop attached to a car dealership, there is a small possibility the part could be fake., The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration is expected to issue an alert today telling consumers whether they should have their vehicles checked for the real McCoy. More than 100 types of vehicle airbags could be involved., But the Detroit News points out these autos are at risk only under certain conditions: the vehicle had to have its airbag replaced within the last three years; and the airbag had to have been swapped out by an independent repair shop, not a dealership. People who bought airbags online could be affected., The push to warn consumers came after federal agents arrested a North Carolina auto mechanic in August who had more than 1,500 counterfeit airbags, says the Associated Press. They linked the mechanic to a Chinese citizen based in Chattanooga, Tennessee who sold fake airbags made in China. Dai Zhensong was convicted last February and will spend more than three years in prison. Immigration and Customs Enforcement says Dai had an elaborate scheme:, The counterfeit airbags were manufactured by purchasing genuine auto airbags, which were torn down and used to produce molds to manufacture the counterfeit airbags. Trademark emblems were purchased through Honda, Toyota, Audi, BMW and other dealerships located in China and affixed to the counterfeit airbags., The counterfeit airbags were advertised on the Guangzhou Auto Parts website and sold for approximately $57 each, far below the value of an authentic airbag., The government isn't aware of any deaths or injuries linked to fake airbags, says Reuters. The AP has a list of vehicles for which counterfeit airbags may be available:, The specific risk is limited. As the Wall Street Journal reports, less than one-tenth of 1% of vehicles on the Road could be affected....that equates to less than 240,000 cars and trucks., Bottom line: if you got your airbag replaced in the past three years, and you had an independent auto repair shop fix your car, have your vehicle inspected. If the airbag was replaced in the past three years, and you don't know where that repair was done, have your vehicle inspected. If you bought your airbag online during the past three years, have your vehicle inspected. The Journal says automakers will set up a hotline to answer consumers' calls.
Former General Electric CEO Jack Welch., Former General Electric CEO Jack Welch., When former General Electric CEO Jack Welch tweeted on Friday that the drop in the unemployment rate last month was unbelievable and that President Obama and his campaign aides will do anything ... can't debate so change numbers, he aligned himself with conspiracy theorists who were asking if some sort of October surprise had been pulled., Labor Secretary Hilda Solis branded such talk ludicrous. Economists pointed to the Labor Department's elaborate procedures for keeping its work secret as evidence that the numbers are beyond political influence., Welch, while conceding that if I could write that tweet again, I would have added a few question marks at the end, as with my earlier tweet, to make it clear I was raising a question, writes in The Wall Street Journal that he still thinks the unemployment report was downright implausible., And, he says, the way he's been treated the past few days is akin to how someone who questions authority might be handled in Soviet Russia [or] ... Communist China., According to Welch, mobs of administration sympathizers have said he should be embarrassed and called him a fool, or worse., As for the drop in the jobless rate from 8.3 percent in July to 8.1 percent in August and 7.8 percent in September, Welch says:, The economy is not in a free-fall. Oil and gas are strong, automotive is doing well and we seem to be seeing the beginning of a housing comeback. But I doubt many of us know any businessperson who believes the economy is growing at breakneck speed, as it would have to be for unemployment to drop to 7.8% from 8.3% over the course of two months., So what would explain a bad number? Welch points to the possibility of subjectivity creeping into the process as information was collected from households about who was and wasn't working in recent months.
Secrets They Won't Teach You At Business School, by Richard Branson, Paperback, 343 pages | purchase, More on this book:, Richard Branson is not your average entrepreneur. He dropped out of school at 15 and, despite suffering from dyslexia and attention deficit disorder, went on to found Virgin Group, a business empire that includes airlines, cellphone companies, banks, hotels, health clubs and even a space travel business., In his new book, Like a Virgin: Secrets They Won't Teach You at Business School, Branson reflects on his dyslexia as well as some frequently asked questions about his success. He joins NPR's Renee Montagne to discuss the book and some of his company's recent projects., On how his dyslexia worked in his favor, I think by being dyslexic, I simplify everything. I calculate everything on the back of an envelope, and if it makes sense I'll do it, and if it doesn't make sense I won't. I don't overcomplicate it. I'll just give you one amusing story: I was having a board meeting and somebody gave me some figures, and I said, 'Well, is that good news or bad news?' And the director said, 'Richard, I don't think you know the difference between net and gross.' And I owned up, I don't. And so he pulled out a piece of paper, and he penciled in a sea and then he penciled in a net, a fishing net in the sea, and he said, 'Well, you know, the fish that are in the net, that's your profit at the end of the year, and what's outside is your turnover.' Sadly, I actually thought it was the other way around; I thought we were doing much better than we were. But ever since then I've been showing off and saying 'net profit' and 'gross profit' ... I suppose the interesting point about all that is it doesn't matter too much, you know. I mean, it's useful to be able to add up and subtract and maybe multiply. And apart from that, you can create an empire with 60,000 employees and find other people to add up the numbers at the end of the year., On the possibility of buying or merging with the bankrupt American Airlines, We don't normally buy other companies or merge with other companies, because you take on a lot of history. Having said that, it would be quite fun to do something with American Airlines. And so, yeah, if anybody from American Airlines is listening, we'd be happy to get your call., On what he would do to turn American Airlines around, You would need to really go into all the planes; gut them out, you know; get the best interior designers, as you would with a new hotel, to completely refigure them, you know; put in the best leather seats; put in the best entertainment you can; work with the crew to make sure they have the best uniforms, the ones which make them really feel great, and let them decide on what uniforms they want to have; and you know, just surpris[e] people. ..., Relative to the income you'll get as a result, it's not a huge expense ... and, ultimately, it's the only way to survive. I mean, when we started 30 years ago with one plane flying out of England, there were 15 American carriers that we were competing with: Pan Am, TWA, Eastern, People Express, etc., etc. Every single one of them ... disappeared. And they disappeared because, although we were much smaller than them, their quality was awful., On how much legacy costs like pensions or an aging fleet affect an airline's ability to make improvements, I think that if [a] company's got a great manager at the top, then they can get these issues sorted out. I mean, it's strange because in America you've got fantastic hotels, great restaurants, but the airline industry just has not gone out to make sure that every single person that flies on those planes [gets] a wonderful experience. And the good thing about that is that leaves room for an airline like Virgin America to emerge. And, you know, we did the same thing with Virgin Atlantic when we started 30 years ago with, you know, one plane against British Airways. And the difference there is that actually British Airways did react, and they did start copying what we were doing, and they did improve their game ... And so, you know, because you've got legacy things hanging over you doesn't mean you can't get your act together., On making air travel more sustainable, About three or four years ago, at the Clinton Global Initiative, I pledged that 100 percent of any profits we made from our airline businesses we would invest in alternative fuels. And what we've been trying to do is come up with a fuel that we can power our planes by that emits no carbon. ..., When we did the first test flight on coconut oil, using coconuts and a mixture, you know, there [were] a lot of jokes made. The chairman of British Airways said it was all pie in the sky, etc., etc. But the most important thing in life is just to try these things, and we tried it., On the common thread between all of his company's ventures, You have to go back to thinking: What is a business? A business is people coming up with an idea to make a difference in other people's lives. And throughout my life, I keep on coming across situations where I feel we can do it better than it's being done. You know, for instance, I used to travel on Britain's rail network, and the rail was run down, dilapidated, run by government; and we went in and persuaded them to give a chunk of it to us. And you know, we absolutely transformed it from 8 million passengers a year to, you know, 33 million passengers a year. And so I think we know how to do it., I'm inquisitive; I love learning about new things. So, you know, we have ended up with sort of 300 or 400 companies, but we've become a sort of way-of-life brand. ... People think of Virgin if they hear that Virgin's going into a new area, they know that the quality will be good, that we'll do it in a fun way, that we'll give good value for money. And so it gives us a leg up when we go into a new venture. People already [trust] us, and they'll give us a try and, generally speaking, people seem to like what they find., Read an excerpt of Like a Virgin
Wells Fargo., Wells Fargo., The U.S. government filed a lawsuit against Wells Fargo &amp; Co., today, saying the bank was reckless when it issued federally guaranteed mortgages., Bloomberg reports:, The government seeks damages and civil penalties under the False Claims Act and the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989 for alleged misconduct spanning more than a decade related to the San Francisco-based bank's participation in a Federal Housing Administration program, U.S. Attorney Preet Bharara in Manhattan said in a statement., 'As the complaint alleges, yet another major bank has engaged in a longstanding and reckless trifecta of deficient training, deficient underwriting and deficient disclosure, all while relying on the convenient backstop of government insurance,' Bharara said in the statement., The FHA has paid hundreds of millions of dollars in insurance claims on thousands of mortgages that defaulted in connection with the FHA's Direct Endorsement Lender Program as a result of false certifications by Wells Fargo, according to the complaint., The Wall Street Journal reports that the government alleges the misconduct dates back to 2001. Essentially, the U.S. says the company issued more than 100,000 loans it said met Federal Housing Administration requirements when they did not., The complaint alleges that the bank knew that in at least half the cases those loans didn't meet federal requirements that would allow them to be insured by the government, the Journal reports., Wells Fargo denied the allegations., Many of the issues in the lawsuit had been previously addressed with HUD, Wells Fargo said in a statement emailed to The Los Angeles Times. Wells Fargo is the leading FHA lender and has acted as a prudent and responsible lender with FHA delinquency rates that have been as low as half the industry average. The Bank will present facts to vigorously defend itself against this action. Wells Fargo is proud of its long involvement in the FHA program, which has helped so many people obtain affordable mortgages and become homeowners.
Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney shakes hands during a rainy campaign rally Monday in Newport News, Va., Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney shakes hands during a rainy campaign rally Monday in Newport News, Va., As part of Solve This, NPR's series on major issues facing the country, we're examining the presidential candidate's approach to boosting employment. After looking at President Obama's strategy, it's time to examine the plan of GOP nominee Mitt Romney., Mitt Romney says he has a plan with 59 bullet points detailing how to boost growth and job creation. He gives a short list in one of his most recent ads:, First, my energy independence policy means more than 3 million new jobs, many of them in manufacturing. My tax reform plan to lower rates for the middle class and for small business creates 7 million more. And expanding trade, cracking down on China and improving job training takes us to over 12 million new jobs., That's 12 million new jobs in his first term in office. As Romney says, more than half of those jobs, 7 million, would be generated by his tax plan. One of the people behind that tax proposal is Kevin Hassett, a Romney economic adviser and senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute., Gov. Romney's tax plan is modeled after the successful tax plans of the past, and it would generate growth because it would increase the incentive to do things that are good for America's economy and America's workers, Hassett says., Romney's tax plan would cut tax rates by 20 percent for all taxpayers. That would cost the Treasury almost $5 trillion in lost tax revenue over 10 years. But Romney says it won't cost $5 trillion, because he will offset the losses from lower rates by ending deductions and closing loopholes; he has not said which ones., Joel Prakken, chairman of the firm Macroeconomic Advisers, says it would be very difficult for Romney's plan to work without ending some very popular deductions mortgage interest, health care benefits and the like., And so, there's some concern out there about whether it actually will be possible to engineer this kind of tax reform with such sharp cuts in marginal rates, Prakken says., Romney has recently suggested he might just cap taxpayers' deductions to $17,000. But some analysts say it's doubtful that would fully pay for the cost of Romney's tax cut, either., Prakken says the elimination of deductions and loopholes could lead to faster job creation in the long run, but in the short term it could eliminate jobs in industries like housing that are already struggling., Until we see precisely how the lower rates are going to be paid for, in terms of broadening the tax base, it's very difficult, it's just impossible, in fact, to make an unqualified statement about just how much growth we're going to get from this kind of tax initiative, Prakken says., As for the 12 million new jobs Romney says his policies will produce in four years, Prakken says it's not a very high bar., In our long-term forecast, in which we assume the continuation of current policies and an economy that's recovering toward full employment anyway, we were able to create roughly 12 million new jobs without recourse to these policies, Prakken adds., But Hassett, the Romney adviser, disagrees that 12 million jobs could be created under current policies., We've got massive deficits. We've got a corporate tax that's just out of whack with the rest of the world. We've got an enormous amount of new regulation coming in, and I think that all those things are very, very negative for growth and job creation, Hassett says., What about Romney's claim that he'll create 3 million new jobs in energy? Prakken says there will be significant job growth in that sector over the next 10 years, but not because of presidential policies. Rather, Prakken says, it's because the energy sector is in the midst of a boom due to the development of hydraulic fracturing, which is releasing huge quantities of U.S. gas and oil., NPR's John Ydstie took a closer look at Obama's jobs strategy Monday on All Things Considered.
A group of baby gators basking in the sun., A group of baby gators basking in the sun., Just outside of Camilla, Ga. about four hours southwest of Atlanta up a dirt road called Alligator Lane, is one of the largest alligator farms in the country., We've got about 20 chicken houses, and we've got about 100,000 alligators on the farm, says owner Mark Glass., That's right, 100,000 alligators, and they are in big demand in Europe's high-fashion industry., Right now it's hatching season., Actually there's one of them on the floor running around now, Glass says, as a black and yellow striped alligator, about 5 inches long from head to tail, scurries across the floor. Glass picks him up., Yeah, that's one that just hatched, that's him barking, he says. And they will bite as soon as they hatch., Glass started out as a chicken farmer. He bought a few alligators to help dispose of dead chickens because burning and burying the birds was getting too expensive. But Glass soon learned that taking care of alligators costs money, too; they need a lot of attention and they eat more than just dead chickens., Glass began raising alligators commercially for their hides and meat., At first he kept them in an outdoor pond, but that almost had near disastrous results. Once, after releasing about 750 alligators into the pond, he took a closer look at the fence., I finally went and picked up an alligator and carried him to the fence and set him down, he walked right through the fence, and I was like 'Oh no, these alligators aren't as big as I thought they were,' he says. We had to quickly get all the hardware stores in town to open up, we bought all the chicken wire that existed. We didn't lose but one or two., But it's quiet on this alligator farm no slapping of tails, no splashing, no Crocodile Dundee. The alligators spend their entire lives indoors in barns where everything is controlled, including food, climate and water temperature., They spend their lives in semi-darkness, so they won't be too aggressive because when they fight, it's bad for business., The industry we are selling the alligator hides into the Louis Vuittons, the Hermes, the Gucci, Prada, Chanels they want perfect premium skins. No scars, no blemishes, no scratches, he says., It's hard to imagine that these prehistoric-looking reptiles, swimming around in a smelly pond on a South Georgia farm, may one day grace the arms of the world's beautiful people., We grow them to somewhere between 3 1/2- to 6-feet long, Glass says. The small hides are 3 1/2- to 4-foot, and they go into the watch strap market for the high-end watches; the 5 1/2- to 6-footers go into the women's handbag market., Glass never imagined himself as an alligator farmer. But he should have had a premonition: 20 years ago, he proposed to his wife at a Florida vacation spot called Alligator Point.
As we approach the presidential election in November, Weekend Edition is seeking your questions about issues and candidates in a new segment called Reporter Hotline. This week, we answer inquiries about the candidates' policies on housing and taxes., A for-sale sign hangs in front of a Homestead, Fla., home. In terms of the housing market, the presidential candidates differ most on regulation., A for-sale sign hangs in front of a Homestead, Fla., home. In terms of the housing market, the presidential candidates differ most on regulation., On paper, President Obama and Gov. Mitt Romney's policy prescriptions are pretty similar. The one major difference is a question of financial regulation. The president is a strong supporter of the Dodd-Frank financial regulations, which include a lot of strong consumer protections for homebuyers. Romney wants to roll back some of those regulations, but he hasn't specified which parts. , Question from Mark Copeland of Chicago, Ill.: In the presidential debate Wednesday, Romney said, 'I will eliminate all programs by this test, if they don't pass it: Is the program so critical it's worth borrowing money from China to pay for it? And if not, I'll get rid of it.' Under this litmus test, which federal housing programs will [Romney] eliminate?, Answer from NPR's Yuki Noguchi: Currently, there are several housing programs. There's HARP, which is the refinancing program, and HAMP, the mortgage-modification program, and then the Obama administration also backs plans that allow homeowners to refinance even if they're under water, which is to say that they owe more on their home than it's now worth. And they also support some forms of loan forgiveness., Mr. Romney's campaign has not been specific about which of those programs he'll keep or which he may scrap. Last year, he said in an interview that he believes the foreclosure market should be allowed to hit bottom so that private capital can come in. And many people heard that and thought this was sort of critical of all government intervention designed to prevent foreclosure., The campaign has backed away from that, and they told me recently that they do support some forms of foreclosure alternatives, although, again, no specifics about which of those alternatives they prefer. .... But they also say the overriding fix for housing has more to do with improving the economy and the jobs picture., We'll be covering a number of issues leading up to Election Day. Submit your questions to ReporterHotline@npr.org.More From This Series, Question from Darren Thiesen of Rathdrum, Idaho: I do have questions if Romney ever does plan to, before the election, actually come up with specific loopholes, specific things that he would like to cut., Answer from NPR's Scott Horsley: Gov. Romney has been vague about the loopholes he would close in order to offset the lost revenue from lowering tax rates. So in the absence of those details, fiscal analysts have had to do some guesswork. One independent study that President Obama often sites looked at what high-income people would save if their marginal tax rate were lowered by 20 percent, and then looked at all the tax breaks high-income people currently get. [The study] concluded, even if you took away all their tax breaks, the rich would still end up paying less. Now, that's assuming you didn't do away with tax breaks for savings and investment., But if you did that, and the rich paid less, then the only way to keep government revenues steady, as Gov. Romney said he wants to do, would be for middle-class families to pay more. The governor argued that if that's how the numbers worked out, he'd simply change his plan to make sure the deficit doesn't go up and that the relative tax burden on the wealthy doesn't go down., President Obama starts by saying he wants to make the tax code more progressive that means the share of tax burden paid by the wealthy would increase. Beyond that, he says he's open to reforming the tax code, lowering rates and doing away with loopholes, which everyone says would make it more efficient. But he doesn't start with a goal of cutting rates by 20 percent., Question from Ian Gard, commenting on NPR.org: Now we are in this situation with way too many loopholes. Assuming that we fix this, though, what is to prevent Congress from doing this again?, Answer from Horsley: The thing is, if you want to encourage some kind of behavior, whether it's going to college or buying a home or building a factory, both Democrats and Republicans have found it a lot easier to sell that program as a tax break than, say, a direct government grant even though, from an economic point of view, it's pretty much the same. So, over the last few decades, the tax code has become the vehicle for a whole lot of government policy. Some of that policy, perhaps, very worthwhile, but it's made for a very inefficient tax system., Question from Bill Shipley of Chicago: I'd like to know what the candidates' positions are on raising the income cap on payroll taxes, given that these are the primary source of funding for Social Security and Medicare., Answer from Horsley: It's an interesting question, you know, because our income tax system is somewhat progressive, but payroll taxes for Social Security are flat to regressive you pay the same rate on every dollar of income, up to about $110,000. And beyond that, you pay nothing. There's no such cap on the portion of the payroll tax that goes for Medicare, by the way., I'm not aware that President Obama's addressed this idea specifically, though I suspect it's something he might be open to. He did rely on an extra payroll tax of about 1 percent for the wealthy to help fund his health care plan. That only kicks in at the $200,000 level not $110, 000 because, of course, he promised back in 2008 not to raise taxes on anyone making less than $200,000.
Supporters watch Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney speak on Friday in Abingdon, Va. Romney started off his campaign calling for big tax cuts, but has backed off that somewhat., Supporters watch Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney speak on Friday in Abingdon, Va. Romney started off his campaign calling for big tax cuts, but has backed off that somewhat., Republican Mitt Romney started his campaign calling for big tax cuts, but now he has changed course. He's warning middle-class families not to raise their hopes too high., Romney couldn't have been more emphatic than he was last November at a candidates' debate in Michigan., What I want to do is help the people who've been hurt the most, and that's the middle class, he said. And so what I do is focus a substantial tax break on middle-income Americans., He put a middle-class tax cut at the top of his priority list: a 20 percent reduction in tax rates across the board., Right now, let's get the job done first that has to be done immediately. Let's lower the tax rates on middle-income Americans, he said., Then, at a debate in Tampa this January, Romney got a little more specific., The real question people are gonna ask is, who's going to help the American people at a time when folks are having real tough times? And that's why I've put forward a plan to eliminate the tax on savings for middle-income Americans, he said. Anyone making under $200,000 a year, I would eliminate the tax on interest, dividends and capital gains., Shaking Up Tax Plans, But then came Romney's victory in the primaries, and a new set of goals to meet., Well, I think you hit a reset button for the fall campaign. Everything changes, campaign adviser Eric Fehrnstrom said on CNN. It's almost like an Etch A Sketch. You can kind of shake it up, and we start all over again., Romney shook up his plans on the tax cuts. He still wanted to lower the tax rates, but now he was more emphatic about the need for tax changes to be revenue-neutral., In September, he had words of caution for the crowd that filled the gym at a suburban Ohio high school., By the way, don't be expecting a huge cut in taxes, because I'm also going to lower deductions and exemptions, he said., In other words, your tax rate might be lower, but your taxable income might be higher. He elaborated in the Wednesday night debate with President Obama., I will not, under any circumstances, raise taxes on middle-income families. I will lower taxes on middle-income families, he said., But he avoided details. He said he would work with Congress, and he quickly moved to talk about another goal: lowering the tax rate for small-business people., If we lower that rate, they will be able to hire more people. For me, this is about jobs, he said., Will The Tax Cut Stick?, As the campaign goes on, Romney gives the tax cuts more and more to do: Help the middle class, produce more jobs, keep the same amount of money flowing into the government, and more., At the conservative think tank American Enterprise Institute, research fellow Michael Strain says Romney has plenty of tax variables he can adjust., There are a lot of different levers to pull here. You have the marginal tax rates, you have the amount of income that's subject to taxation, you have the amount of income that you can deduct from your gross income to calculate your taxable income, Strain says., Is a middle-class tax cut possible with everything else? Strain thinks it is., In order to do that, you would have to have a specific plan. And we haven't seen that from Gov. Romney yet, he says., But at the nonpartisan Tax Policy Center, co-director William Gale says Romney is caught in a bind., He has made a set of proposals that are jointly impossible to fulfill. And so something has to give, he says., It may be that what's giving as Romney told the crowd in Ohio is the middle-class tax cut.
Air Force F-22 Raptors, made by Lockheed Martin, are prepared for flight operations at Langley Air Force Base. Despite the looming defense spending cuts that would go into effect in January if Congress does not pass a deficit reduction plan, Lockheed Martin and other defense contractors announced this week they would not issue layoff notices., Air Force F-22 Raptors, made by Lockheed Martin, are prepared for flight operations at Langley Air Force Base. Despite the looming defense spending cuts that would go into effect in January if Congress does not pass a deficit reduction plan, Lockheed Martin and other defense contractors announced this week they would not issue layoff notices., Major defense companies said this week they will not send out layoff notices to warn of big job cuts in January, taking away the prospect of embarrassing layoff notices right before the November elections., That's led to charges that the White House overstepped when it told the industry the notices are not needed., EADS, the aerospace giant that includes Airbus, says it remains very worried about automatic cuts that could wipe out around 10 percent of the defense budget on Jan. 2, 2013. But spokesman Guy Hicks says the company now believes it will have some time to trim its workforce., We assume because it's the law that it will occur, Hicks says. But the implementation of it is not necessarily going to take place on the second of January. It's likely to unfold over a longer period of time, which gives us the latitude to wait. Lockheed Martin has come to the same conclusion., Layoffs Look Bad In Politics, The decisions followed reassurances from the Obama administration that these cuts are not unavoidable. After all, Congress can decide at any time to come to a budget agreement, and toss out those automatic cuts known as sequestration. In addition, some defense jobs rely on ongoing contracts that won't be affected not right away, at least., For those reasons, the White House said, the defense industry doesn't have to send out notices under a law called the WARN Act, which is supposed to help workers prepare for layoffs., Even if it begins on Jan. 2 ... there will be no plants closed, there will be no massive layoffs on Jan. 4th or Jan. 5th or Jan. 6th, says Dan Gordon, who used to work in the Obama White House and now teaches at George Washington University., But Republicans say the White House is just trying to head off embarrassing layoff announcements right before the election. Republican Sen. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina told Fox News the White House is dodging the law., It is a mini-coup, Graham said. You're having the executive branch unilaterally telling the private sector to ignore a congressional statute., The White House went a step further, promising to cover any legal costs the industry might face because workers can sue if they're fired without proper notice. Republican Sen. John McCain said he will block the use of government funds for that purpose. Of course, that only comes into play after the election. In the meantime, workers are caught in the middle., Jobs Are Still On The Chopping Block, Nobody has talked to workers or their unions about the impact of this, says Thomas Buffenbarger, president of the International Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers., Buffenbarger says the White House took care of management's concerns, but ignored workers, who still might lose their jobs next year. He says the White House is trying to manipulate his members., With a pink slip in one hand and their ballot in the other, how do you think they're gonna vote? Buffenbarger says. Well, I would suspect they would vote against whoever the incumbent is, Republican or Democrat., The truth is that defense workers know full well that next year may be a rough one. Many have attended rallies urging Congress to stop the automatic cuts from happening. The question is who will get the blame for the whole budget mess. As GWU's Gordon says, this battle is not about some obscure law that requires layoff notices., The WARN Act is, in my humble opinion, a red herring, he says. The real issue is reaching budget agreements so that we don't have sequestration., Both parties still appear very far from any agreement to avoid those automatic budget cuts, so the issue will return during what promises to be a raucous lame duck session. That return, however, won't come until after the election.
Retailers expect to hire hundreds of thousands of extra holiday workers this year, but the hours can be scarce and unpredictable., Retailers expect to hire hundreds of thousands of extra holiday workers this year, but the hours can be scarce and unpredictable., Retailers across the country expect to hire hundreds of thousands of extra workers this holiday season to help with the anticipated spike in sales. Retail workers who have been hustling year-round for more hours are looking at that news with a jaded eye because the vast majority of these seasonal jobs will disappear after December, sending many of these workers back scrounging for more work., With a 17-hour workweek, Onieka O'Kieffe is left with a lot of time on her hands. Too much time. She said she very often sleeps 12 hours a day just because she can., That's typically the case. Like, if there's nothing else to do, O'Kieffe said. Because I'm mostly at home anyway., O'Kieffe, 22, is a part-time manager at a hardware store in the Bronx called Harbor Freight Tools. She makes $10 an hour. When the store cut her hours weeks ago, she started making less than her little sister, who's a cashier at Burger King earning $7.25 an hour., So O'Kieffe will be joining the estimated 600,000 retail workers grabbing up holiday jobs this year to supplement their incomes., She said she has no choice she and her sister live with their mother, who's on public assistance and doesn't work. And O'Kieffe said she's has $4,000 of credit card debt., But scraping up a seasonal retail job isn't easy. O'Kieffe hit the streets of Midtown Manhattan this week to hunt down some work, darting in and out of Foot Locker, Sephora, Lush, Mango, Bebe, Aldo and Fossil. In store after store, she filled out job applications, dropped off her resume and picked up fliers for job events the stores were hosting. Repeatedly, clerks told her only part-time work was available, and no one promised a minimum number of hours., Some of the biggest stores in the country have announced they're hiring more holiday workers this year than last stores like Macy's, Toys R Us and Wal-Mart. But these jobs will be fleeting. And that's the catch for year-round retail workers who can never find enough work., Onieka O'Kieffe, 22, hits the streets of Midtown Manhattan to find a retail job this holiday season. She says she needs the second job because she's only getting 17 hours per week at her current job., Onieka O'Kieffe, 22, hits the streets of Midtown Manhattan to find a retail job this holiday season. She says she needs the second job because she's only getting 17 hours per week at her current job., So they can go from a 35-hour workweek in December to a five-hour workweek in January, and then see the company lay them off and then hire a whole new workforce in February for Valentine's Day, said Carrie Gleason, who heads Retail Action Project, a worker advocacy group., U.S. Census data show the percentage of part-time retail workers who want to be full-time has doubled since 2006. And the hours aren't only scarce; they're unpredictable., You might get 15 hours, but you don't know what days they're going to be, said Susan Lambert, who studies low-wage labor at the University of Chicago. And so that might require you, for example, if you're a parent, to have to arrange child care for five days a week even though, really, you only end up working three days a week., But retailers say it's not their fault if hiring is unpredictable, because the entire economy is unpredictable. And the holiday season means taking on even more risk than usual., Everything about the holiday season for retailers is a guessing game, said Ellen Davis of the National Retail Federation, a retail trade association. How many people should I hire? What should my marketing and promotions be like? How much merchandise should I bring into my stores? And which stores should get more merchandise than others?, Davis said retailers start making their seasonal hiring decisions in August or September. The dilemma for them, she explained, is that if they hire too few people, customers get annoyed. If they hire too many, they're saddled with high labor costs they can't justify with sales., And the people caught in the middle are workers like O'Kieffe, who just need more hours., It sucks that those are the jobs being offered like I'm only good enough for three months and then, like, that's it. I'm out with nothing, she said., O'Kieffe dropped out of college because she needed a job to pay for two more years. She said she now has to pay back about $10,000 in student loans for the years she's already finished. So at this point, she has no idea if she'll ever get to go back to school.
President Obama and Mitt Romney are both calling on the U.S. to become less dependent on foreign oil, though their plans differ. Here, workers with Bramwell Petroleum set up a derrick for a new oil well near Spivey, Kan., in March., The pressing energy issue in the 2008 presidential campaign was how to reduce carbon emissions and limit global warming. Four years later, the drive for green energy has been replaced by a new imperative: the need to end U.S. dependence on foreign oil., I will set a national goal of North American energy independence by 2020, Mitt Romney declared during a campaign speech in August. That means we produce all the energy we use in North America., He reiterated that goal in the opening minutes of the presidential candidates' debate in Denver this week., President Obama is not far behind, though his interest in energy security is somewhat muted by concerns over the environmental impact of fossil fuel production. The Obama plan would cut oil imports in half by 2020., The rationale is obvious. With a secure energy supply of its own, the United States would be less affected by instability in the Middle East and elsewhere. Indeed, every president since Richard Nixon has touted a plan for energy independence., Dependence On Foreign Oil Declining, The revived emphasis on this goal in the current campaign reflects a sense that U.S. self-sufficiency in energy has become a more realistic goal today than at any point in decades, due to a domestic energy boom., The heightened tumult in Iran, Iraq, Libya and other countries, meanwhile, has underscored the danger of depending on Middle Eastern oil suppliers., Romney and Obama, however, have starkly different approaches to the problem of achieving energy self-sufficiency., The Obama administration has set higher fuel economy standards for cars and promoted alternative energy sources. Here, a Ford Focus electric car is shown during a test drive in San Jose, Calif., in July., The Obama administration has set higher fuel economy standards for cars and promoted alternative energy sources. Here, a Ford Focus electric car is shown during a test drive in San Jose, Calif., in July., Romney would boost production by extending a helping hand to energy companies, promising a relaxation of environmental restrictions on exploration and production, a green light on infrastructure projects such as the Keystone pipeline, and more permits to drill for oil and gas on federal lands., For energy advice, Romney turns to oil executives like Harold Hamm, chairman of Continental Resources., In testimony before the House Energy and Commerce Committee last month, Hamm said oil companies are facing an onslaught of new environmental regulations that raise production costs without producing a commensurate level of environmental benefit., He noted that his own company tries as much as possible to avoid [drilling on] federal land, concentrating on private property instead. He cited the Obama administration's policies and restrictions, saying Continental had waited as long as two to three years to get permission to drill on federal land, whether onshore or offshore., Domestic Production Rising, In fact, petroleum production in the United States during President Obama's first three years in office jumped by 24 percent, while oil imports declined by a similar amount., In the first eight months of 2012, imports accounted for just 42 percent of the total oil consumed in the United States, the lowest figure in more than 20 years., The Romney team, however, says the jump in U.S. energy production occurred almost entirely on private land and had little or nothing to do with the Obama administration's energy policies., Independent analysts generally agree, saying the energy bonanza has largely been due to new technology and techniques like hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling, with high oil prices providing a further incentive to expand production., On the other hand, Romney argues, new federal policies could spur even more oil production, on private as well as government land, because energy companies are more likely to invest in new U.S. ventures when they see a U.S. president signaling he will accommodate energy production., That view makes sense, says Daniel Ahn, chief commodities economist at Citigroup., I would posit that if whoever is in the White House next year leans toward a more supply-friendly scenario, says Ahn, there will be great [investor] interest, and likely the markets will respond., For his part, Obama has welcomed the new domestic energy production and promises to support it during a second term., I want us to control our own energy destiny, he declared during a speech last March in Cushing, Okla. So, yes, we're going to keep on drilling. Yes, we're going to keep on emphasizing production., A Different Emphasis, The Obama plan, however, focuses relatively less on increasing the supply of domestic oil and more on reducing domestic demand. In that Oklahoma speech, the president argued that more drilling alone would not necessarily make the United States more energy secure., Even if we drilled every little bit of this great country of ours, he said, we'd still have to buy the rest of our needs from someplace else if we keep on using the same amount of energy, the same amount of oil., Energy analysts like Ahn says Obama makes a good argument. The progress in moving toward energy self-sufficiency, Ahn points out, has not come just from the boost in oil production., A less heralded but potentially even more important factor has been [a] decline in U.S. oil consumption, Ahn says. That's also helping achieve, quote-unquote, energy independence., One factor explaining this decline in oil consumption is that our cars are now more fuel efficient thanks in large part to fuel efficiency standards backed by the Obama administration., Romney wants to relax those standards. The Obama plan would also reduce the demand for oil by boosting energy alternatives like wind, solar and natural gas., Behind the differences of emphasis in their energy plans lie other noteworthy policy differences. Romney would eliminate tax credits and other subsidies for the wind and solar industries. Obama would continue them., The Obama plan, on the other hand, calls for eliminating tax breaks for the oil industry. The Romney plan would keep those., Greater energy security is the goal in both the Obama and Romney plans, though by different routes, at different speeds, and with different collateral consequences.
Motorcyclists Hanna Gilan, right, and her son Chaim Gilan fill up their Vespa scooters with less than two gallons at a gas station in the Echo Park district of Los Angeles on Oct. 4, 2012., Motorcyclists Hanna Gilan, right, and her son Chaim Gilan fill up their Vespa scooters with less than two gallons at a gas station in the Echo Park district of Los Angeles on Oct. 4, 2012., Gas prices spiked overnight Thursday by as much as 20 cents per gallon in parts of California, causing some stations to close and shocking many customers., According to The Associated Press, the average price of regular gas across the state was nearly $4.49 a gallon. In other parts of the country, gas prices have fallen. South Carolina has the lowest average gas prices in the continental U.S. at $3.49 a gallon., Patrick DeHaan, senior petroleum analyst at GasBuddy.com, told AP that the highest gas prices in California were around Los Angeles, where at least five stations crossed the $5 a gallon mark on Thursday., But sadly for drivers in the Golden State, gas prices will keep going up, because while wholesale gasoline prices have increased $1 per gallon, average retail prices have increased by just 30 cents, according to DeHaan., The AP also says:, The national average for gas is about $3.79 a gallon, the highest ever for this time of year. However, gas prices in many states have started decreasing, which is typical for October., But in California, gasoline inventories are the lowest in more than 10 years a situation made worse by the state's strict pollution limits that require a special blend of cleaner-burning gasoline during hot summer months., What's fueling these high prices? Refinery and pipeline troubles, which pushed wholesale costs to a record high this week, according to the Los Angeles Times., The Times reports:, Analysts attributed the increase to mishaps that have befallen some of the state's 14 refineries, which operate with little margin for error because few facilities outside California make the state's cleaner-burning gasoline., This led some gas station owners to stop buying fuel. What if they couldn't sell it? When those stations ran out of the cheaper gas, they closed their pumps., Other station owners just took a chance on the more costly fuel, hoping customers would understand., NPR's Carrie Kahn will report more about price pressure at the gas pump on this afternoon's All Things Considered., (Tanya Ballard Brown is an NPR.org editor.)
Here's a little math problem for you: How many calories go into the ethanol that's in your tank of gas?, Enough to feed 22 people, if you're talking the bare minimum calories needed in a single day, according to researchers at the New England Complex Sciences Institute., Their calculation, published today, is based on all the corn-based ethanol that's sloshing around in most U.S. gas tanks; it's really just grain alcohol a quaff familiar to many college students. Most of the gas sold at the pump contains about 10 percent ethanol. You would never eat the ethanol once it's blended into gasoline, of course. But a lot of corn goes into making ethanol, and the researchers recently crunched the numbers on that corn's food energy value, which you can see in the graphic below., Source: Yaneer Bar-Yam, NECSI, Credit: Stephanie d'Otreppe, NPR, The researchers detail their facts and figures here. A few caveats: The corn used to make ethanol doesn't all get turned into fuel. About a third of it comes back out of the ethanol factory as distiller's grains, which are then used to feed animals., So some of those corn calories still end up in your steak, not your car. And if that corn weren't used to make ethanol, it would probably go into animal bellies (and, only indirectly, into human ones). Only a relatively small percentage of field corn gets processed into foods from corn meal to sweeteners; the majority becomes animal feed or ethanol., Still, the bigger question here whether so much food should be burned up as fuel is getting asked a lot these days. This year, ethanol could consume as much as 40 percent of the U.S. corn crop. But with the worst drought in more than 50 years leading to soaring corn prices, many people are calling on the U.S. to rethink its mandate requiring refineries to make a minimum amount of ethanol 13 billion gallons this year and blend it into gas., The EPA is currently accepting public comments on whether to waive the ethanol mandate for next year. By law, a decision is due by Nov. 13. Farmers blame the mandate for driving up the price of livestock feed (some have resorted to feeding their cattle candy as a cheaper alternative)., That's why several governors and members of Congress have asked the EPA to lower or suspend the Renewable Fuel Standard requirements for next year., But the researchers at NESCI say there's an even more pressing reason to consider dropping the ethanol mandate than hungry cattle: the risk of hungry, rioting people., For Americans, higher corn prices will likely translate into higher meat prices at the grocery store next year. But it's the world's poor who really feel the impact. A growing number of studies have blamed the ethanol mandate in the U.S. by far the world's largest corn exporter for pushing up food prices around the world., And as we told you earlier this week, mathematical modeling by NECSI researchers shows a strong link between high food prices and social unrest in places sensitive to price swings so strong that it may be predictive of when riots are more likely to break out. That model found that the conversion of corn to ethanol is one of the key factors pushing food prices higher., What happens here ... is driving the global food crisis, Yaneer Bar-Yam of the New England Complex Sciences Institute tells The Salt. We've put into place policies that affect food in a very large way., But corn math can get complicated, and freezing or easing the ethanol mandate may not help as much as its critics hope. A paper by economists at Purdue University recently looked at several different possible scenarios. Their conclusion? Changing the ethanol mandate could make a big dent in corn prices next year or not. The folks at WONKBLOG do a good job of breaking down the findings. As they succinctly put it, there's no simple solution here.
President Obama smiles during a rally Friday at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va., President Obama smiles during a rally Friday at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va., To become president and to be re-elected president takes much luck (among other factors, like money and political skill.) And President Obama appears to be one of the most fortunate presidents in recent memory with the release of the latest employment report., With a month left before the general election, the U.S. Labor Department's report that the jobless rate dropped to 7.8 percent in September falling below the 8 percent barrier for the first time since early in Obama's presidency was good news not just for the nation, but for a president who needed some right about now. The economy also added 114,000 jobs in September, below estimates, but still a decent number., Coming as it did on the heels of the president's widely derided debate performance against Republican challenger Mitt Romney on Wednesday night, the new economic data was likely to give a timely jolt of renewed confidence to a Democratic presidential campaign that was thrown off stride by the debate., At a campaign rally in Fairfax, Va., a Washington, D.C., suburb, Obama walked the line of marking the good news while trying not to seem too triumphant since there were still more than 12 million people looking for work:, After losing about 800,000 jobs when I took office, our businesses have added 5.2 million new jobs over the past 2-1/2 years. This morning we found out that the unemployment rate has fallen to its lowest level since I took office. More Americans entered the workforce, more people are getting jobs., Now, every month reminds us we still have too many of our friends and neighbors who are looking for work. There are too many middle-class families that are struggling to pay the bills. They were struggling long before the crisis hit. Today's news certainly is not an excuse to try to talk down the economy to score a few political points. It's a reminder that this country has come too far to turn back now., If it was good news for the president, it raised a new challenge for Romney. Would his attacks against Obama's management of the economy be dulled by the good economic news now that the jobless rate has fallen below the 8 percent psychological barrier?, Obama's re-election chances have long been clouded by how halting the economic recovery has been. The president has been haunted specifically by an optimistic forecast, made by some of his economic experts early in 2009 as part of their argument for the $800 billion fiscal stimulus, that it would cause the unemployment rate to peak at 8 percent., Of course, it eventually went higher, topping out at 9.9 percent in May 2010 before it began declining. The difference, however, between Obama's economists' forecasts despite all their warnings that such forecasts are inexact and the reality of the actual jobless numbers, gave Obama's Republican opponents plenty of fodder to attack him over much of his presidency., While Friday's relatively good employment report clearly had to be a relief for the Obama campaign, it was indisputable that the economy was still far from robust. That left plenty of room for Republicans, especially Romney, to continue their economic attacks against Obama., And, indeed, that was the only approach that made sense this late in the campaign, since Romney's entire argument for his candidacy boils down to an argument that Obama has failed to turn around the economy and that the former Massachusetts governor's success in the private sector makes him the better choice for the White House., Romney issued a news release along those lines:, This is not what a real recovery looks like. We created fewer jobs in September than in August, and fewer jobs in August than in July, and we've lost over 600,000 manufacturing jobs since President Obama took office. If not for all the people who have simply dropped out of the labor force, the real unemployment rate would be closer to 11%. The results of President Obama's failed policies are staggering 23 million Americans struggling for work, nearly one in six living in poverty and 47 million people dependent on food stamps to feed themselves and their families. The choice in this election is clear. Under President Obama, we'll get another four years like the last four years. If I'm elected, we will have a real recovery with pro-growth policies that will create 12 million new jobs and rising incomes for everyone., In the hothouse atmosphere of a presidential race, even the integrity of the economists and statisticians who produce the Bureau of Labor Statistics jobs data became a casualty of political warfare., Former GE CEO Jack Welch, for instance, through a tweet, questioned the timing of the September jobless rate falling to 7.8 percent:, Unbelievable jobs numbers..these Chicago guys will do anything..can't debate so change numbers., The Chicago guys would be Obama and his campaign team, which is based in the nation's third largest city., Coming to the Bureau of Labor Statistics' defense was Lawrence Mishel of the Economic Policy Institute, a progressive think tank., It is simply outrageous to make such a claim, and echoes the worrying general distrust of facts that seems to have swept segments of our nation. ... BLS is a highly professional agency with dozens of people involved in the tabulation and analysis of these data. The idea that the data are manipulated is just completely implausible., It was just the latest example of statistics being seen through a partisan lens., In recent weeks, the reliability of polls from some of the nation's most respected polling firms has been questioned by Republican critics because they showed Obama leading in most battleground states. Republicans accused the pollsters of sampling bias, of phoning too many Democrats relative to Republicans. Pollsters, and some Republican non-pollsters, have dismissed such suspicions., One more official jobs report is scheduled for release before the general election. That comes on Nov. 2, just four days before Americans go to the polls., Coming as close as that one will to the election, it may be too late to do either presidential campaign significant good, especially with all the early voting taking place throughout the nation., So Friday's report may very well be the last one that really matters to the 2012 presidential election.
Democrats say the economy is growing and jobs consistently are being added. But Republicans note that the pace is far too slow to absorb the more than 12 million people still looking for work., Democrats say the economy is growing and jobs consistently are being added. But Republicans note that the pace is far too slow to absorb the more than 12 million people still looking for work., October 5, 2012, With a new report showing the nation's unemployment rate fell to 7.8 percent last month, the Obama administration got good news Friday: Jobs are indeed growing. But, as Republicans noted, the pace remains well below the level needed to provide paychecks for the 12.1 million people seeking them., The truth is, each party could find evidence to support either a positive or negative spin on the labor market, which is recovering yet weak., At a Friday campaign rally in Virginia, President Obama focused on the continued growth. He said the jobs report is a reminder that this country has come too far to turn back now., Republican candidate Mitt Romney saw something very different. If not for all the people who have simply dropped out of the labor force, the real unemployment rate would be closer to 11 percent, he said in a statement., Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney held a campaign rally Friday in Abingdon, Va., Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney held a campaign rally Friday in Abingdon, Va., The competing views both have validity. Before considering the spin, here are the facts:, Meanwhile, President Obama held a rally of his own at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va., Meanwhile, President Obama held a rally of his own at George Mason University in Fairfax, Va., All this year, the unemployment rate had been vacillating in a narrow range between 8.3 percent and 8.1 percent, where it stood in August. But the rate fell to 7.8 percent in September, after a household survey showed more people say they are working., The Labor Department also revised some summer data. August payrolls actually rose by 142,000, better than the initially reported 96,000, while July was revised up to 181,000, from an earlier estimate of 141,000. Last month, employers added 114,000 jobs, almost exactly what economists had predicted., A Negative Take On The Jobs Data, The pace of improvement is far too slow to absorb the backlog of people seeking work. About 100,000 new jobs are needed each month simply to keep pace with population growth., The jobless rate would be much higher today more like the 11 percent Romney notes if labor force participation were as high as when Obama took office. Many people have dropped out of the workplace, either to take early retirement, go back to school or to stay home, because they don't see much hope of finding a good job., To return to, say, 6 percent unemployment within three years, economists say employers need to be adding about 375,000 workers a month., Alternatively, A Positive Take, In January 2009, when Obama took the oath of office, the U.S. economy lost more than 800,000 jobs., By spurring Congress to immediately pass the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, the president turned around that employment plunge and kept our economy from swerving over the cliff, according to Rebecca Thiess, a policy analyst at the Economic Policy Institute, a left-leaning research group., The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office says the stimulus created up to 3.3 million full-time jobs and helped stabilize the labor market in the 2009-2011 period. Since the recovery kicked in, the private sector has added jobs for 31 straight months, bringing the total to 5.2 million new jobs., So What's The Outlook?, The past three-and-a-half years could be considered a split decision, with good points and bad. But what lies ahead?, Romney says his economic policies would create about 12 million jobs over the next four years. But many independent economists say that's the same number of jobs that would be created under current policies., Joseph Davis, chief economist for the mutual fund giant Vanguard, said he doesn't see the unemployment rate improving significantly until Congress takes definitive action to reduce the deficit and the debt. Having lawmakers constantly put off major decisions about taxes and spending is creating tremendous uncertainties for employers who feel they can't make hiring plans until they know what their taxes will be and whether government spending on infrastructure, defense contracts and more will continue., If we don't see a meaningful change in terms of clearing up policy uncertainty, then it's very difficult to see the economic trajectory change, Davis said. If we could adopt a credible and binding plan to reduce the deficit, that would go a long way in reducing uncertainty and opening the door to new employees, he added., What Are People Saying Today? , Friday's big move in the jobless rate did not go unnoticed by Romney supporters, many of whom suggested the Labor Department manipulated the data. For example, Jack Welch, the retired CEO of General Electric, tweeted that the drop in the jobless rate was unbelievable, and added this reference to Obama: can't debate, so change numbers., The Bureau of Labor Statistics has a reputation for honest work. The monthly jobs report is put together by dozens of career professionals who tabulate and analyze data. Mainstream economists say that with so many people involved, manipulating data is extremely implausible., Labor Secretary Hilda Solis, speaking on CNBC, said the jobs report is reliable. These are our best-trained and best-skilled individuals working in the BLS, and it's really ludicrous to hear that kind of statement from Welch, she said., The BLS report is supported by an independent measure, which found similar results. Gallup, the polling company, calculated that September's unemployment rate, without seasonal adjustments, fell to 7.9 percent, which was the lowest [level] Gallup has recorded since it began collecting employment data in January 2010.
The Labor Department revised the number of jobs added in July up by 40,000 jobs and the number of jobs added in August up by 46,000. These revisions have some people asking questions about the way the Bureau of Labor Statistics measures employment., Here's a breakdown: the numbers in the monthly jobs report come from two places the household survey and the establishment survey. The household survey is used to calculate the unemployment rate and the establishment survey is used to calculate how many jobs the economy gained or lost the previous month., The household survey data comes from Census Bureau workers going to people's homes and asking them if they are working, if they are looking for work, etc. The establishment survey comes from the BLS contacting businesses and government agencies and asking them about the total number of employees they have, how many hours they've worked, etc. The BLS can't talk to every single person or every single business so they talk to about 140,000 businesses and government agencies and 60,000 households, and they use that data to calculate the job situation for the entire economy., The revisions in the latest jobs report come from the establishment survey, and the reason they happen is that the BLS doesn't have all the information at the time the numbers are calculated. The BLS gives businesses and government agencies a deadline to submit their data but not everyone makes it. The information that comes in after the cut off date is what causes the revisions. BLS economist Megan Barker explained it to me this way:, After the press release, we are continuing to get more data so that can cause slight movements in what is showing as employment change over the month. We do have a second and a third revision to all of our data., So if a business didn't get the BLS their data in time for the official release, they'll show up in the revision. Another reason the numbers change Barker says, it that sometimes the BLS will choose to hold data. If the numbers they get from a business seem unusually high or how, the BLS may wait until it can verify them., The revisions in the jobs numbers can look big at times, but the BLS says you have to remember that they are counting a lot of jobs., You are forgetting that what we are really measuring is 133 million jobs and so in 133 million jobs the over the month change is not terribly large, and the revisions that you see are small adjustments to that over the month change, Karen Kosanovich, another economist at the BLS, told me., The unemployment rate fell to 7.8 percent in September, that number comes from the household survey., For more about the jobs numbers listen to our show, Episode 392: Keeping The Biggest Secret In The U.S. Economy.
Why America Is Losing The Global Race To Capture Entrepreneurial Talent, by Vivek Wadhwa, Paperback, 106 pages | purchase, More on this book:, A new study from the Kauffman Foundation shows that the number of immigrant entrepreneurs in the United States has fallen slightly. But according to Vivek Wadhwa, an author of the study, the drop is especially steep in Silicon Valley, long a magnet for the brightest and most ambitious minds from around the world., From 1995 to 2005, immigrants founded 52 percent of the startups in Silicon Valley. The updated research shows that since 2005, that dropped to 44 percent. Wadhwa joins NPR's Renee Montagne to discuss his findings., On the reason for the drop in immigrant entrepreneurs in the past seven years, Well, the No. 1 reason is because we won't give the foreign people who are already here visas to start companies. My research has also documented that there were 1 million skilled immigrants waiting for green cards, for permanent resident visas. And we had predicted if we don't fix the immigration system, they'd start leaving. Now this is in 2007, when we had published that research. Well guess what? They're leaving., On the case of Anand and Shikha Chhatpar, an Indian entrepreneurial couple who are part of the immigrant exodus, Vivek Wadhwa is vice president of Academics and Innovation at Singularity University. In 2012, he was recognized as an Outstanding American by Choice by the U.S. government., Well, Anand and Shikha Chhatpar, they started a company called Fame Express that was building really cool Facebook apps. They signed up a million users in almost no time, building lots of revenue. Annan and Shikha paid a quarter of a million dollars in taxes while they were here. They had to go back to India to get their visa adjusted to start the process of permanent residency, and the U.S. government wouldn't let them back, despite the fact that they were hiring Americans, they were doing well, they were here legally. Annan had filed eight patents, so the guy was exceptional. No one was disagreeing that he's a worthy candidate. But even the head of the immigration department couldn't fix this. So now they're living in India, paying Indian taxes, employing Indian workers. It's a big loss for America. This is the stupidity of our immigration system., It happens far more than you would imagine. You have to live in Silicon Valley and hear the horror stories. You go and hang out at the cafes, and you meet entrepreneur after entrepreneur who's struggling, basically who's had a visa problem who wants to start a company, but they can't start companies. It's really heartbreaking to go to Silicon Valley and see what could be and what isn't., On his proposition for a new immigration program that would allow foreigners to get visas without a large investment, If we had a startup visa which allowed any foreigner to start a company here, if after three or four years the company is employing less than five Americans, that person is ineligible for a green card. That would lead to tens of thousands of new startups, possibly hundreds of thousands of startups, which would generate hundreds of thousands, maybe millions of jobs all for a cost of zero., The graduates of Stanford [University] and Duke University, they don't have a million dollars lying around. Typically when you do a technology startup, you have $20,000 or $30,000, and you build an Instagram, you build a Facebook. You build companies like this with very low seed capital. There's no way they can come up with a million dollars upfront., That whole process of getting that EB-5 visa, as it's called, is so cumbersome that it could take a year or longer, and you don't know if you're going to get it. By that time your idea is stale. In the technology world, you have to execute fast or you're out of business., Read an excerpt of The Immigrant Exodus
Luca Pacioli is the one on the left. (Nobody knows who the guy on the right is.), The story of the birth of accounting begins with numbers. In the 1400s, much of Europe was still using Roman numerals, and finding it really hard to easily add or subtract. (Try adding MCVI to XCIV.), But fortunately, Arabic numerals (1, 2, 3, 4, etc.) started catching on, and with those numbers, merchants in Venice developed a revolutionary system we now call double-entry bookkeeping. This is how it works:, Every transaction gets entered twice in financial records. If one day you sold three gold coins' worth of pepper, you would write that the amount of cash you had went up by three gold coins. You would also write in that the amount of pepper you had went down by three gold coins' worth., Before double-entry, people just kept diaries and counted their money at the end of the day. This innovation allowed merchants to see every aspect of their business in neat little rows., Jane Gleeson-White wrote the new book Double Entry: How the Merchants of Venice Created Modern Finance. She explains how significant this new accounting was:, You could itemize the profits in each account, so you knew which products you were doing well in and which you weren't. Then you could start to think about how you would change your business activities. It was just a whole revolution in the way of thinking about business and trade., A page from Pacioli's math encyclopedia, Summa de Arithmetica, Geometria, Proportioni et Proportionalita., A page from Pacioli's math encyclopedia, Summa de Arithmetica, Geometria, Proportioni et Proportionalita., Luca Pacioli was a monk, magician and lover of numbers. He discovered this special bookkeeping in Venice and was intrigued by it. In 1494, he wrote a huge math encyclopedia and included an instructional section on double-entry bookkeeping., Thanks to the newly invented printing press, his book was mass produced and became a big hit. One of the first readers was Leonardo da Vinci, who at the time was painting The Last Supper. Pacioli's encyclopedia had a section on the mathematics of perspective painting which fascinated da Vinci., They were hanging out together....I think they were probably lovers. They certainly spent a lot of time together, and definitely Luca Pacioli was there in the church when Leonardo da Vinci was there in the actual church when Leonardo da Vinci was painting The Last Supper, said Gleeson-White., What Pacioli is known for today, though, is that tiny section of the book about accounting. Today, every country and every business uses double-entry bookkeeping.
The welcome sign at a job fair earlier this year in Washington, D.C., The welcome sign at a job fair earlier this year in Washington, D.C., With the first presidential debate now behind us, what's the next big item on the campaign calendar?, It's Friday's 8:30 a.m. ET release from the Bureau of Labor Statistics about the September unemployment rate and how many jobs were added to payrolls last month., Here's what we'll likely hear, according to economists surveyed by Reuters and Bloomberg News:, &mdash; That there was an uptick in the jobless rate, from 8.1 percent in August to 8.2 percent., &mdash; That there was a net increase of about 115,000 jobs on private and public payrolls. That's weak growth, but slightly better than the preliminary estimate of a 96,000-gain in August., If those forecasts turn out to be correct, that means Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney and his supporters will again talk about how the jobless rate has remained above 8 percent throughout President Obama's time in office. It also means that Obama and his supporters will focus on how there's at least been slow, steady job growth for more than 2 1/2 years., They'll have one more chance to debate employment figures before Election Day, by the way. The October jobs report is due on Nov. 2. Election Day is Nov. 6., We'll be posting on Friday's news when it comes. Watch for related posts on Planet Money and It's All Politics.
Ben Blier, 5, of Washington, D.C., is obsessed with Star Wars, especially the books and Legos, according to his mom, Nancy., Aruna Jayaraman knows where to find lemonade. Her son's friend Alexander sells it out in front of his house every weekend, hoping to earn enough money to buy a $400 Lego Death Star., We have gone to Star Wars-themed parties and gifted Star Wars Legos, because all the little boys are into it, says Jayaraman, a doctor who lives in Santa Rosa, Calif., Jayaraman's son, Ishwar, and his friend are both 5 meaning they were born after the last of the six Star Wars films came out. But just as all toddlers seem to go through a public works phase in which they want to play with trains and trucks, millions of slightly older boys find their way to Star Wars., I don't know why I didn't expect this, but kids really like the book, maybe even more than the adult audience, says Jeffrey Brown, author of Darth Vader and Son, a best-selling panel book about Vader's frustrations raising a 4-year-old Luke Skywalker. A lot of people have said their kids want it as their bedtime book just again and again and again., For the better part of the last decade, Star Wars has consistently been one of Hasbro's most popular boys brands, and one of Hasbro's top brands overall, says Derryl DePriest, vice president of boys marketing at Hasbro, which sells Star Wars toys and games., There hasn't been a new theatrical release since 2005, but there are constant additions to the Star Wars universe of books, video games and cartoons. This past Saturday saw the fifth season premiere of Star Wars: The Clone Wars on Cartoon Network. (The popular kids show is also now in syndication.), This coming Saturday, more than 1,200 bookstores and libraries nationwide will participate in Star Wars Reads Day, a promotional event featuring author readings and costumed characters., I don't think it compares to any other pop culture property in terms of staying power, says Rachel Kempster, director of marketing at DK Publishing, one of several publishers with Star Wars lines. They continue to sell well, though not much is changing in the movie universe., Marketing Behemoth, The original Star Wars movie was released back in 1977. If a kid these days happened to become fixated on another hit movie from that period, such as Jaws or Close Encounters of the Third Kind, his parents would be hard-pressed to find much on eBay beyond used DVDs., But there are endless amounts of stuff readily available for Star Wars fans of all ages including more reasonably priced Lego sets and hoodies for babies, R2D2 spatulas and Darth Vader shower curtains., A lot of our assortment is built around the hottest, trendiest thing that's happening right now, the latest movie release, says Scott Lametto, vice president of merchandise at Party City, which sells costumes and party wares. Star Wars has become an evergreen, and it does well for us, day after day, year after year., There's no mystery to why Star Wars remains popular with young boys, says Robert Thompson, a pop culture professor at Syracuse University. It's got just about everything they like spaceships, creatures that look like dinosaurs, creatures that look like teddy bears., The films are exquisitely simple and executed in a way so that they're user-friendly to a kid, he says., As for young girls, their interest in Star Wars tends to grow when there's some major event, such as the theatrical re-release of a movie, says DePriest, the Hasbro executive., It's interesting that girls want what the boys are playing with, too, he says. They don't want a Star Wars toy that is colored or changed to the types of play patterns girls want., A Technical Universe, Camille Paglia, a humanities professor at the University of the Arts in Philadelphia, stresses the multiple portrayals of father-son dynamics not just between Luke Skywalker and Darth Vader, but the master-apprentice relations of the Jedi in general., Ben Blier (left) and his friend Jesse Bleckner hang out in their Yoda T-shirts. On his first day of kindergarten, Ben wore a Yoda T-shirt with Go to Kindergarten I Must printed on the front and Learn Things I Will on the back., The Star Wars saga ... fused ancient hero legends from East and West with futuristic science fiction and created characters who have entered the dream lives of millions, Paglia writes in her book Glittering Images, due out Oct. 16, in which she suggests Star Wars creator George Lucas is the greatest artist of our time., The depth of Star Wars' imaginative world is a major part of the attraction. Lots of young boys can rattle off information about the differences between spaceships or entire galaxies without having seen any of the movies., Boys versed in Star Wars share a private language about a vast technical universe that is simultaneously imaginary and concrete, re-created in Lego plastic blocks, Paglia says in an email interview., Something For All Ages, It's unusual for movies that appeal to one generation of kids to catch the fancy of the next. And, while no self-respecting 15-year-old would be caught dead wearing a T-shirt featuring one of his early childhood favorites Thomas the Tank Engine, say, or the Berenstain Bears plenty of teens are still into Star Wars., Volkswagen's 2011 Super Bowl commercial featuring Little Darth Vader became an overnight Internet sensation. , It's become such an important part of kids' lives when they're growing up that it has a nostalgia value as they get older, says Howard Roffman, a longtime licensing executive with Lucasfilm Ltd., the Star Wars production company. We've been fortunate that we haven't suffered from the phenomenon where you embrace something as a kid and it becomes uncool when you're older., In part, that's because the books and video games have been carefully targeted at fans of different ages. New content also helps keep the brand current. There was a period during the late '80s and early '90s between the release of the two film trilogies when Star Wars toys wouldn't sell., Lucasfilm and its many licensees have since been clever about renewing interest by bringing out new story lines through books, games and cartoons. You do need new entertainments, you do need new events that keep people engaged, or, in some cases, introduce it to a new generation, Roffman says., Characters who were bit players in the movies, such as the bounty hunter Boba Fett, have become big stars in the world of ancillary products. Lots of little kids seem to love R2D2, thanks to his beeping and whistling and small stature., George Lucas was just smart in creating a variety of characters, all the different characters that people can relate to, says Jon Scorfina, manager of Star Clipper, a comic book store in University City, Mo., that is loaded with Star Wars paraphernalia., Star Wars is a product line that we can always put in the window, and people will come in for it, he says. If you put the Darth Vader cookie jar in the window, people will come in and ask about it.
There were 367,000 first-time claims for unemployment benefits last week, an increase of 4,000 from the previous week, the Employment and Training Administration says., The bottom line: This doesn't mark any significant change in the jobs market, especially considering the 4-week moving average was 375,000, unchanged from the previous week's revised average. That figure is a better measure of labor market trends., What we've said in recent months remains true: Claims have been stuck in a range between 350,000 and 400,000 for the past year and are running at a pace that underscores how the labor market appears to be only slowly improving., Reuters reports that this week's numbers were slightly better than economists expected:, Economists polled by Reuters had forecast claims rising to 370,0000 last week. The four-week moving average for new claims, a better measure of labor market trends, was unchanged at 375,000. It was the first time since December last year that the four-week average was unchanged. ..., Despite fears of tighter fiscal policy next January, there is little sign that companies are responding by laying off workers on a wide scale.
Customers at a Hartford produce market, choosing grapes to turn into homemade wine., Customers at a Hartford produce market, choosing grapes to turn into homemade wine., If buying a local wine just isn't local enough for you, then you might consider joining the growing ranks of people making homemade wine this fall., Some home winemakers make wine with friends for fun, some make wine with family for tradition; some make it old school, adding nothing, and drink it by Christmas; others do it new school, adding preservatives, and wait a year or more to bottle., I started making wine at home with friends a couple of years ago, and we picked up our white grapes, shipped from California, last week., The loading dock at the M&M; Wine Grape Co. in Hartford, Conn., was stacked high with boxes of grapes, destined for home winemakers. The regional market where it does business bustles with winemakers and shoppers looking for bulk produce for grocery stores and restaurants., Around the boxes, people were wandering mostly men. Some stuck their fingers into the boxes of merlot and muscat to taste the fruit they may want to buy, dodging forklifts as they did. Others were inside, settling their tabs., Mario Zavaglia stood between the dock and the bed of a pickup truck, as he slid big buckets of grape juice into the truck. He told me he doesn't mess with the grapes themselves anymore, he just gets the juice. With the grapes, you gotta work three times more, said Zavaglia. I did it with my grandfather. My father, my grandfather did it. I was a kid., Next to Zavaglia was a nice pickup with a trailer heavy with boxes of grapes. Its owner, Rich Sabato, is clearly a serious winemaker. He started a few years ago making small batches of wine from kits. Then, eventually, he went all in, high-tech. He has $15,000 in equipment alone, and that day, he and his friends were bringing home a gigantic haul., This year, we're buying 5,600 pounds of grapes, said Sabato. That's about 300 gallons of wine. For Sabato, wine making runs in the family, too. His grandfather did it first in Italy, then in South Philadelphia., When he died, nobody else did it and it was kind of lost. And that's what drove me, Sabato explained. It's not wood barrels like the old country, it's not Lucille Ball stamping it with her feet in a tank, but it's a lot of fun, a little camaraderie, and we share it with our friends., When some friends and I decided to try it out a few years ago, we read up on it a bit. Then we started small. But last year, I found myself with 150 gallons aging in my basement., When we picked up our chardonnay grapes this year, they'd already been taken off the stem and crushed. So all we had to do was slide them into the truck, take them home and get to work., DIY winemaker John Virtue presses the grapes in a Middletown, Conn., backyard., DIY winemaker John Virtue presses the grapes in a Middletown, Conn., backyard., And that work includes a lot of testing. First, we test to make sure the juice has the right amount of sugar to make the right amount of alcohol after fermentation is done. If there's not enough sugar, you can add it; if there's too much, you can dilute it with distilled water. In this case, the sugar was right on target for a wine that's 12 or 13 percent alcohol, so we didn't add anything., There are other tests, too like testing the total amount of acid in the juice, testing the strength of the acid and testing the total amount of sulfites (which act as a preservative)., As for the sulfites, the retailer added the right amount of sulfites to the crushed grapes for us before we brought them home, and, at this stage, they have one very specific function to kill off any natural yeast that may have been on the grapes., Why? Because, the theory goes, we have no idea what kind of yeast is on the grapes, and therefore we have no idea what kind of wine it will yield. So, if you kill the natural yeasts, you can then add your own., As we test, we also press. It's a messy process. Once the press is fairly full of grape pulps, we put some wood pressing blocks on top and crank it down a few times, breaking down the pulp or the cake. Eventually, the juice stops running. This time we got about 50 gallons worth, which we put into glass containers topped with airlocks., Next, it's time to add the yeast we bought, but the juice has to come to room temperature first (the grapes had been refrigerated when we picked them up). So we wait a day and come back to pitch the yeast., When we returned a day later, the yeast had started to work, turning juice into wine, bubbling off gas as it did., Soon, we'll have a young chardonnay to share. In two weeks, when the red grapes come in, we'll do it all over again.
A plump specimen is plucked out of a bin holding this year's local harvest at the Ohio Shrimp and Fish Festival., A plump specimen is plucked out of a bin holding this year's local harvest at the Ohio Shrimp and Fish Festival., It's harvest time in the heartland, but not just for apples and squash. In small, back-lot ponds on farms across the Midwest, a different crop has been growing all summer. They're substantial, slightly sweet and a revelation to the land-locked palate, not to mention worth top dollar. Yep, it's shrimp season in Ohio., But don't ask for any Midwestern shrimp at your local fishmonger. There aren't enough yet to make it to the store., Despite recent advances in feed and concerted efforts by several Midwest states to make shrimp-farming in earthen or cement ponds a viable business in recent years, it's still fraught with too much economic risk to attract many growers. I would not get into it if you're planning on making a lot of money, said Duke Wheeler, who owns a shrimp farm in Whitehouse, Ohio. Economically, it's probably a break-even. On the stress level, it's a negative., A big source of stress is making the shrimp's tropical biology work in a part of the world where growing seasons are four months or less. And between spring and fall, growers also have to worry about their teeming larvae being eaten by other pond-dwellers and by each other., It turns out that the species of freshwater shrimp most often grown in the U.S., a Malaysian specimen, Macrobrachium rosenbergii, are rapacious cannibals. They need to molt something like 11 times in the month when they're doing a lot of their growing, and every time one of them casts off its armor, its soft little body is eyed hungrily by its neighbors., Between the weather, predation and cannibalism, 50 to 60 percent survival rate is pretty standard, and growers are overjoyed when they get 70 to 80 percent, according to William Wurts, an aquaculture specialist at Kentucky State University., For Midwest shrimp farmers, one thing is certain: They can't compete with imports from the exploding Asian aquaculture industry on price. The stuff that's importing from Malaysia and southeast Asia, frozen, that's $2 a pound half the cost of production here, says Wurts., As the biggest importer of shrimp (including the farmed freshwater variety), the U.S. has an interest in encouraging a domestic supply. Federal agencies like the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration are funding the development of new types of feed that alleviate the need for fish meal as a protein source. Some of these feeds depend on corn and soy, which this year may be an expensive addition to the supply chain., Instead of competing on price, inland shrimpers are marketing freshness. Harvest festivals such as the Ohio Fish and Shrimp Festival in late September bring out the local community to taste the freshly caught shrimp. And while they're there, they can purchase some of the more economically favorable farm products like trout and perch., There's certainly demand for shrimp. According to Dave Smith, who runs the festival, the shrimp sold out in two hours last year. This year, the festival pooled harvests from several producers, including grain farmers who have started growing shrimp on the side., He's even thinking of ways to grow saltwater marine shrimp in his Urbana, Ohio-based aquaculture operation. The marine shrimp are less cannibalistic, and if we can figure out the heating, we can do it year-round., But for Duke Wheeler, in northern Ohio, the economics of raising shrimp just haven't worked out. After sinking $7,000 in a new pond to add shrimp-farming to his family's Christmas tree operation five years ago, he has warned his customers that he probably won't be continuing the shrimp operation in the future., I love shrimp, and my wife loves shrimp, said Duke Wheeler, but this year we didn't get any, and there weren't enough for our volunteers., If we do it another year, he says, it's strictly because of the joy that we bring to the families. That might be motivation enough.
The General Motors headquarters in Detroit. The U.S. government bailout of GM and Chrysler has been a key economic issue in the presidential campaign., In their first debate Wednesday night, the two presidential candidates will explain their plans for fixing the U.S. economy., Good luck., The problems are complicated and long-standing, so the solutions may not be easy to spell out in the two minutes allowed for each answer under the debate rules., But President Obama, the Democratic incumbent, and former Gov. Mitt Romney, his Republican challenger, will try, and about 60 million people are expected to tune in. This first debate will focus on domestic issues, with the economy topping the list of homefront problems., For five years, Americans have been struggling with waves of home foreclosures, high unemployment rates, stunted wages, crushing student-loan burdens and losses in retirement accounts. The economy has been recovering for more than three years now, but immense challenges remain., Neither candidate has been clear about specifics. Romney, for example, has called for a 20 percent, across-the-board cut in income-tax rates, along with the elimination of many tax deductions and exemptions. But he has not spelled out which tax breaks he would end., Obama, likewise, has said he would reduce the corporate income tax rate from 35 percent to 28 percent. But he too has been vague on exactly which deductions he would eliminate to make up for lost revenue., But the level of taxation won't be the only issue. Americans will hear lots of buzzwords whose meanings may not be entirely clear. Here are three terms likely to come up in the debate:, Candidates often pledge to help small businesses, but there is no one definition for small. The U.S. Small Business Administration says that to qualify for federal support, businesses can vary in size, depending upon the industry. For example, a steel mill with as many as 1,000 employees is still small. In contrast, a computer-equipment wholesaler can have only up to 100 employees to qualify. But in general, when politicians talk about small businesses, they mean those with 500 or fewer workers, and less than $7 million in annual sales. Many people who regard themselves as small-business owners are operating franchises of larger enterprises, such as chain restaurants and cleaning services., This is the amount of taxes paid on an additional dollar earned. Here's an example: The government might impose a 10 percent tax on annual income of $25,000. But then, after meeting that income threshold, there could be a 20 percent marginal tax rate on each dollar above $25,000. The person making $25,001 a year wouldn't owe 20 percent taxes just 10 percent on $25,000 and then 20 percent on the one additional dollar. Politicians typically are arguing about that marginal rate, not the basic tax rate., A bailout is the catchall term for any help the government offers to prop up a failing business. The form of aid can vary so it might be a loan or a cash infusion. Or the government might buy stock, which it can later sell, as it has done with the General Motors bailout. Sometimes, the government gets fully reimbursed, but not always. For example, Chrysler has repaid its loans in full. But the Treasury still owns GM shares that are worth about half the amount needed to fully repay the government. Congress usually offers a bailout to rescue lots of jobs, or to shore up a key sector, such as banks. For example, under the Bush administration, the government provided about $700 billion to bail out the financial institutions that were crumbling in 2008.
For more on the junk economy, see this slideshow., There's a neighborhood in New York City that has always been a mystery to us. Smack dab in the middle of Manhattan, around 29th street, is the wholesale district. There you can find rows of narrow storefronts packed to the ceiling with trinkets. Racks and racks of fake gold chains. Acres of souvenir lighters and walls of belt buckles. Plastic, plastic, plastic toys., It's not surprising that these things exist. But why would you sell all this cheap junk from stores sitting on some of the most expensive real estate in the world?, It's not as if we make it here. Most of it comes from Asia., And it's not just to sell this junk to New Yorkers. We just don't need that many key chains., The trinkets are here because this stretch of Midtown is a hub in a vast global network of junk. When stores in Africa or Latin America or the Middle East run short, they come here., The biggest reason is one of scale. Small stores in developing nations can't handle a whole shipping container filled with thousands of rhinestone bracelets. They only need a few. So the people in New York's wholesale district order the big loads and sell the bracelets by the dozen., Still, why does it have to be stored in Manhattan and not in a warehouse in New Jersey? Why can't the buyers just get it over the phone or the Internet?, We ran into a Nigerian businesswoman in a cheap perfume store in the area and asked her. Kemi Alao was buying for her boutique, Lasting Impressions, in the town of Jos. She said it's hard to send money electronically from Nigeria and make sure you are getting what you paid for. Even when she flew directly to China, she said, she found that she couldn't trust the quality., Alao says it's much easier to bring cash and some empty suitcases to New York and buy stuff in person. That way you can tell if merchandise is flawed or counterfeit. And you can look people in the eye when you do business., For buyers like Alao, New York City makes logical sense as a trinket hub. It's easy to get to this city from the rest of the world. And once you get here, everything is close together. Alao can't drive between warehouses in New Jersey. In Manhattan, she can walk a couple of blocks and see hundreds of different stores. The more customers, the more stores pop up. And the more stores, the better the selection., But like any hub, this neighborhood is only as strong as the network around it. And in the past few years, the businessmen in the wholesale district say, it's been getting tough. It's not just the economy. Since the Sept. 11 attacks, it's been harder to move money and merchandise in suitcases on planes. And the City of New York has been cracking down on parking and making it harder to ship in the junk., In any other type of business, these stores would have already moved out of Manhattan. But the wholesalers fear the African and Latin American customers would never venture out of the city to find them. And so they stay. Better to huddle at the crossroads than to be off alone in the middle of nowhere.
Maregarita Magana, 34, snips off the stem of an early Fuji apple in Chiawana Orchards near Pasco, Wash. State farmers worry that many apples might be left on the trees this year., Maregarita Magana, 34, snips off the stem of an early Fuji apple in Chiawana Orchards near Pasco, Wash. State farmers worry that many apples might be left on the trees this year., In western Michigan, there aren't enough apples to pick because bad weather decimated 85 to 90 percent of the crop. But Washington state has the opposite problem there's an abundance of apples, but not enough pickers., This should be the happiest, busiest time of year in Washington apple orchards. But now just as the peak of apple harvest is coming on Broetje Orchards manager Roger Bairstow is wincing., There are quite a few of us that aren't sleeping through the night, he says., Right now, Broetje has nearly 2,000 workers. They're out on tall aluminum ladders plucking dusty red and green apples from the trees. Music plays from the smartphones of workers, and Gala apples thud gently into the waiting bins., Amilia Magno, 23, of Pasco, Wash., carries a heavy load of buckeye gala apples in Broetje Orchards near Prescott, Wash., Amilia Magno, 23, of Pasco, Wash., carries a heavy load of buckeye gala apples in Broetje Orchards near Prescott, Wash., But Bairstow says the orchard still needs at least 200 more experienced pickers. And apples have a limited branch life., The longer an apple stays on the tree, the worse the condition gets and the less likelihood of getting a good price on the market, Bairstow says. So at some point, it's not even worth picking., If the fruits are left on the tree too long, they can only be used for apple sauce or juice, which is less profitable than whole fruit., The labor shortage comes as Washington state's apples are worth more. That's because competitors like New York, Michigan, Canada and Europe have low yields this year due to bad weather. And China, the world's biggest apple producer, is keeping more of its fruit at home to feed an expanding middle class., With the strong market, Washington farmers are going to extremes to get and keep workers. Some are buying commuter vans to transport employees from one orchard to the next. Others are paying up to 15 percent more in wages or giving bonuses for workers who stay the whole season., Broetje is building its own rental apartments in town and advertising for pickers as far away as Arizona and Ohio. The fastest workers can earn about $1,000 per week., The price is good, apple picker Ruiz Olman says, and he likes working here. Olman is earning about $50 more each week compared with last year. And, for him, this orchard is easier to get to from where he lives., But the work is physically demanding. Jeff Rippon, a manager at nearby Chiawana Orchards, says pickers have to scale tall ladders and carry 40-pound sacks of apples on their chests for at least eight hours a day. He'll hire anyone who wants the work, but he says he has trouble finding enough people. So, like many farmers across the country, he ends up relying on migrant workers., I've been picking apples since 1965, and I've never seen a white person yet pick more than an hour, Rippon says. Seriously! By the time you get the paperwork done, they've decided it's too hard to do., Another problem for farmers is that fewer migrant workers are coming up from Mexico. That's because there's more violence and increased security on the border., It's too late to fix these problems for this year, but farmers are planning for the future. Some are planting new, shorter trees so picking is easier. Others are developing mobile platforms to help pickers gather apples without ladders. Rippon says one way or another, growers who want to stay in business will have to address the labor shortage., A few people will go broke and a few people will make a whole lot of money. And the people that will make the money are the ones who can adapt to change. It's just a fact of life, Rippon says., For now, apple farmers are racing winter. Workers will stop showing up in the orchards as the colder weather sets in. Many farmers worry that in these next few weeks, the worker shortage will only turn more rotten.
Despite millions of troubled mortgages around the country, housing hasn't been a major issue in the presidential race so far., Despite millions of troubled mortgages around the country, housing hasn't been a major issue in the presidential race so far., Housing continues to be a big issue for the economy, and for many voters. But so far it hasn't been a major issue in the presidential campaign. Perhaps that's because both sides agree that there's no easy fix for the problem of millions of troubled mortgages., The Problem: , Cathy Busby and her husband co-owned a realty office in Denver when they bought their house in 2006. The next year, the market for houses dried up, leaving them with little income as their house lost value., Now, she says, she considers herself poverty level., The presidential debates come to Busby's hometown Wednesday. And she says she's just one of many voters in swing states who want better housing solutions out of Washington. She says her lender offered three separate loan modifications, only to rescind each one, even though she says she signed and paid everything required., Busby says she and her husband also spent countless hours trying to help some 50 other Denver families negotiate with banks to get their mortgages modified. Not one of those attempts was successful., I'll tell you what I learned, she says. It doesn't make any difference what you do. These banks never had any intentions of really modifying loans., Now, some banks did modify loans and can prove it, but lots of people share Busby's view that as an industry, there wasn't much of an effort., Obama's Approach:, The Obama administration has tried through a variety of programs to encourage the modification of loans, offering banks both incentives and penalties., In the past year, the administration has pushed for more loan forgiveness. It's backing a bill in Congress that would reduce fees for refinancing., Speaking in February in Virginia another swing state President Obama unveiled a refinancing program for those who are underwater but still current on payments., Too many families haven't been able to take advantage of the low rates, because falling prices lock them out of the market, he said., Michael Barr, a University of Michigan law professor, former Treasury official and surrogate for the Obama campaign, says that since the president took office, 16 million homeowners have refinanced, and 5 million more have modified their loans, through either a government or bank program. In a second term, Barr says, the president would both fine-tune existing programs and ensure that the new Dodd-Frank financial regulations create a strong safeguard for future homeowners., There is no silver bullet, he says. There are lots of things that need to get done. Each homeowner's circumstance is somewhat different. And trying to figure out how to get them help is, I think, a more complicated and difficult task than would be reflected in a bullet point or a sound bite., Romney's Approach:, Late last fall, in an interview with the Las Vegas Review-Journal, Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney seemed to dismiss the government's efforts to modify loans., Don't try and stop the foreclosure process, let it run its course and hit the bottom, allow investors to buy homes, put renters in them, fix the homes up and let it turn around and come back up, he said., Former Republican Rep. Rick Lazio of New York, a spokesman on housing for the Romney campaign, says Romney would not abandon modification or refinancing programs. But he would focus more on rolling back new financial regulations, as well as on winding down mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac a process the Obama administration has already begun., In our view, President Obama's response to the mortgage crisis has been slow, confused and largely ineffective, Lazio says., Lazio says Romney's fix for housing goes beyond specific policy prescriptions., Jobs and the economic picture is overwhelmingly the most important part of the solution, he says., The Reality:, Urban Institute President Sarah Rosen Wartell says so far, the campaigns have a lot more in common than their rhetoric suggests., Many of the most interesting questions are places where neither candidate has laid out their direction, she says. Questions about government's role in the housing sector from regulating access to credit, for example, to whether to eliminate the popular but expensive mortgage interest deduction., Questions that may not affect the immediate term, but could affect how the housing sector will function for years to come.
From 'Morning Edition': NPR's Jim Zarroli reports, New York's attorney general has sued JPMorgan Chase, alleging that a unit now owned by the banking giant fraudulently sold mortgage-backed securities in the run-up to the 2008 financial crisis., The civil lawsuit filed Monday by state Attorney General Eric Schneiderman is the first to be brought by the RMBS Working Group the task force formed by President Obama in January to pursue alleged wrongdoing at the time of the financial crisis., In a complaint filed today in New York State Supreme Court, Schneiderman said Bear Stearns, which is now owned by JPMorgan, deceived investors about the securities, leading to monumental losses, according to Bloomberg., Here's more from Bloomberg:, The current cumulative realized losses on more than 100 subprime and Alt-A securitizations that the defendants sponsored and underwrote in 2006 and 2007 total about $22.5 billion, or about 26 percent of the original balance of about $87 billion, the state said., The Wall Street Journal reports more cases are expected to follow., Here's more from the Journal:, The allegations relate to billions of dollars of subprime securities issued by Bear Stearns Cos. before the troubled firm, now owned by J.P.Morgan, collapsed in 2008. The suit alleges that losses on residential-mortgage securities issued by Bear Stearns in 2006 and 2007 alone were 'astounding,' totaling $22.5 billion, or more than a quarter of the original principal balance. The action asks that the company be made to pay an undisclosed amount of damages 'caused, directly or indirectly, by the fraudulent and deceptive acts.', Joseph Evangelisti, a spokesman for the company, told the Journal that JPMorgan is disappointed in the decision, and intends to fight the suit., In a statement, the RMBS said the filing shows that it is not too late for justice.
In this Nov. 19, 2011 fie photo the U.S. Capitol building is seen in Washington., In this Nov. 19, 2011 fie photo the U.S. Capitol building is seen in Washington., Unless Congress passes legislation in a lame-duck session, taxes will be higher by a half-trillion dollars next year, costing the average household nearly $3,500 a year, according to a just-released report by the Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center., After studying details of the tax changes now set to take effect for 2013, the researchers were struck by how big the tax increase is, said Eric Toder, one of those researchers. It's a huge, huge number., The report concluded that in 2013, almost 90 percent of Americans would see their taxes rise., The tax changes are part of what has come to be known as the fiscal cliff, a range of temporary tax-break expirations and government-spending cuts. The coming changes are set on auto-pilot; they were put into place by U.S. lawmakers who could not agree on permanent compromises. (Our friends at Planet Money have an explainer.), Over the past 11 years, starting with President George W. Bush's first term, Congress has passed an array of temporary tax cuts and patches to fix tax code flaws. Last year, Congress also imposed automatic spending cuts that will kick in shortly. Congress is out of session until after the Nov. 6 election, and will deal with the issues in a lame-duck session, starting Nov. 13., Economists are virtually unanimous in saying that unless Congress changes course before Dec. 31, the country will be driven over an economic cliff and into a new recession., The Tax Policy Center examined just the tax implications (pdf), and found that the coming changes would indeed have a dramatic impact., Policymakers are rightly concerned about the potential impact on families and the economy of such a sudden tax increase and are considering proposals to delay, repeal, or offset parts of the cliff, the report said., At a press briefing this morning, the researchers said Congress appears ready to allow the temporary cut in Social Security payroll taxes to expire. That's because that one was always intended as a temporary stimulus measure, the report said., The 2007-2009 recession technically has been over for more than three years, so the justification for saving the average worker about $20 a week has ended. That means everyone earning a paycheck would see their contribution to Social Security revert to where it was before the recession, leaving them with a smaller take-home amount., And wealthy Americans who own stocks would see very big changes, with their taxes going up 7 percentage points on long-term capital gains, and by more than 20 percentage points on qualified dividends., If investors believe it will actually happen, the pending increase in the capital gains tax rate could induce them to sell appreciated stocks, bonds, and other assets before the end of 2012, the report warned.
1 of 9, One hundred years ago, before Walmart and Whole Foods and Albertson's and Kroger, grocery shopping was a very different experience., Many American city dwellers flocked to the indoor public markets huge, high-ceilinged halls lined with vendors hawking everything from fresh fruit and vegetables to full-service meat and fish counters., Some were centrally located, like Eastern Market in Washington, D.C. and West Side Market in Cleveland. Seattle's Pike Place Market, now 105 years old, is still going strong. But smaller neighborhood public markets also thrived, as did roadside stands in the summer., Over time, though, the brightly lit supermarket, with aisles of already packaged goods, emerged as a more convenient option for mid-century America's harried housewives. And in many cities, the old public markets were demolished., But now there's a reversal, as urbanites and developers keen on fresh food and a more personable shopping experience rediscover the public markets and revive them. As we've reported, farmers markets are proliferating with impressive speed, and the old indoor markets are getting facelifts., In Washington, D.C., the old Centre Market reopened this month as Union Market, featuring high-end vendors selling everything from homemade kimchee to smoked fish. Some towns, like Napa, Calif., are building indoor public markets from scratch., What you can see is that we're starting to move back to the market city model, says Brendan Crain, a spokesman for the Project for Public Spaces, which this month hosted the 8th International Public Markets Conference in Cleveland. Supermarkets are not going away, but there's a lot more variety now., Have a look at the slideshow for glimpse of public markets, then and now.
This story is part of our occasional series Fiscal Cliff Notes. , If the Bush-era tax cuts expire at year's end for all income groups, here's how much Americans with different annual income would be affected, on average., Source: Tax Policy Center, Credit: Alyson Hurt / NPR, If the Bush-era tax cuts are allowed to expire, the majority of Americans will see their taxes rise. Those who will see the largest increase are the wealthy., Dr. Hamilton Lempert, an emergency room doctor in Cincinnati, works almost exclusively on overnight shifts., I spent the first 30 years of my life in school in order to do what I do, Lempert says. I work between 40 and 70 hours a week, and I earn money doing what I do., This puts Lempert in the top 5-percent of income earners and the top tax bracket. He says he knows he's fortunate and paying taxes is just something that comes with it., When he runs his financial information through an online calculator to figure out how his tax bill would change if the Bush-era tax cuts are allowed to expire, he gets a shock., Lempert would take about a $20,000 tax hit., That's a lot of money, he says. I will have to decide what to do for vacation. I may not be able to put as much away for purchasing a replacement car when my car dies., High-Income Impact: If The Cuts Expire, $14,871: The average estimated increase in federal taxes for the top 5 percent of income earners, those with $204,000 in annual income and above. This represents a 5.2 percent tax burden increase., $120,537: The average estimated increase in federal taxes for the top 1 percent of income earners, those with $506,000 in annual income and above. This represents a 7.2 percent tax burden increase., $633,946: The average estimated increase in federal taxes for the top 0.1 percent of income earners, those with $2.6 million in income and above. This represents a 7.2 percent tax burden increase., Source: Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center, That car is, as he describes it, a beat up 14-year-old Subaru. Lempert's tax bill will rise because itemized deductions will be limited, marginal tax rates will go up, and dividends will be taxed at a significantly higher rate., Virtually everyone in his income category will see their taxes rise an average of about $14,000, says Roberton Williams, a senior fellow at the nonpartisan Tax Policy Center. That's about a 5 percent reduction in their after-tax income, and 5 percent is something that's, even at that income level, noticeable., Williams says in terms of dollars and cents, and even as a percentage of income, the people who will be hit the most if the tax cuts expire are the wealthy, because they received the greatest benefit from the cuts.
After inadvertently airing live coverage of a car chase that ended with a man's suicide, Shepard Smith of Fox News has issued an apology to viewers of his show. The incident occurred as the cable network carried a live feed of a man fleeing police on the interstate west of Phoenix., In the footage, the man abandoned his vehicle and began running across a field, before pulling out a gun and shooting himself in the head. Despite being filmed from a helicopter hovering above the scene, the footage was graphic enough to prompt immediate yelling in the Fox News studio., The scene led anchor Shepard Smith, who had been speaking over the video and describing the man's actions, to yell Get off it, get off it several times to his studio crew. The broadcast abruptly cut to a commercial., We really messed up, Smith said when the program resumed shortly after the break. And we're all very sorry. That didn't belong on TV., Smith explained that the five-second time-delay that would normally keep such an event from being seen by viewers somehow didn't keep the suicide from being televised Friday., The event spurred several people to upload video of the chase scenes from Studio B with Shepard Smith to YouTube Friday; others expressed their amazement and/or horror on Twitter., There had been little indication that events would take such a dramatic turn earlier in the broadcast, as Smith spoke over live footage showing the man, who was suspected in a car-jacking, trying to elude police in a red SUV near Tonopah, Ariz., After pulling off the highway and onto a dirt road, the man got out of the driver's seat and appeared to take some items from the car. Then he set off running down the road, and eventually onto a grassy area, where he turned a weapon on himself just after the camera zoomed in on him., I personally apologize to you that that happened, Smith said when his program returned. That was wrong. And that won't happen again on my watch. And I'm sorry., He then promised to give an update on the story and the video later tonight, before repeating, I'm sorry., Update at 11:30 a.m. ET, Oct. 1. Fox Cites Severe Human Error., In a statement sent to reporters, Fox executive vice president of News Editorial Michael Clemente says:, We took every precaution to avoid any such live incident by putting the helicopter pictures on a five second delay. Unfortunately, this mistake was the result of a severe human error and we apologize for what viewers ultimately saw on the screen.
Bank of America's corporate center in Charlotte, N.C., Bank of America's corporate center in Charlotte, N.C., While denying it did anything wrong, Bank of America announced this morning it will pay $2.43 billion and institute certain corporate governance policies ... to settle a class action lawsuit brought in 2009 on behalf of investors who purchased or held Bank of America securities at the time the company announced plans to acquire Merrill Lynch., Reuters reminds us that plaintiffs had alleged, among other claims, that Bank of America and certain of its officers made false or misleading statements about the financial health of Bank of America and Merrill Lynch., In 2009, Ohio Public Radio's Jo Ingles reported on the suit for All Things Considered. Back then, Ohio State University law professor Paul Rose predicted that BofA would eventually settle. You'll see a settlement often coupled with some sort of corporate governance change or something that they feel is really important, he said., In its most recent earnings report, BofA said it had net income of $2.5 billion in second-quarter 2012. But a year ago, as NPR's Chris Arnold reported, it was struggling to restore investors lost faith: How Bank Of America Lost Its Balance.
Higher prices at the pump meant the amount of money consumers spent went up last month., Higher prices at the pump meant the amount of money consumers spent went up last month., Americans' personal income grew by just 0.1 percent in August from July and consumer spending would have been basically flat as well if it hadn't been for higher gasoline prices, the Bureau of Economic Analysis reported this morning., Overall, spending grew 0.5 percent last month. But, writes Reuters, households stretched to pay for higher gasoline prices. According to the report, the cost of energy goods and services, which gasoline is a large part of, rose 5.8 percent in August from July., Since consumers purchase about 70 percent of goods and services, their spending is a key economic driver., Bloomberg News says the August spending news because the growth was mostly due to higher prices, not stronger demand for goods and services signals the economic expansion is struggling to gain momentum.
Specialist David Pologruto works at his post on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange on Sept. 13, as Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke holds a news conference in Washington. The world's central banks are easing credit, putting more money into the global economy., Specialist David Pologruto works at his post on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange on Sept. 13, as Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke holds a news conference in Washington. The world's central banks are easing credit, putting more money into the global economy., The world's central banks are pumping cash into their economies, pushing down interest rates in hopes the ready cash and lower rates will boost borrowing and economic activity. Everyone agrees the action is dramatic and unprecedented, but there's disagreement over whether they will do more harm than good., Economists know very well the trillions of dollars being added by the central banks to the global economy can be risky., These are risks about long-term rises in inflation, housing bubbles potentially building up, says Jacob Kirkegaard of the Peterson Institute., Those are the kinds of things that happen when too much money chases too few goods., James McCaughan, head of Principal Global Investors, says one such response was obvious right after the Federal Reserve announced QE3, its latest round of stimulus., One of the natural reactions was that the oil price went up, McCaughan says. Now, that's not so good for most economic activity., He says it's bad for consumers, businesses and job creation., It's a perverse effect of something that was intended to improve employment, he says., But not everyone agrees with McCaughan's analysis, and oil prices have fallen again in the past week., Harvard economist Ken Rogoff says given the sluggish global economy, he thinks the risk of inflation from too much central bank stimulus is small. And, he says, the potential rewards are worth that risk., Yes we don't want to be a banana republic where we have rampant runaway inflation, but make no mistake this is a very risky situation, he says. The aftermath of the financial crises ... is long and ugly and it could be far from over., It could take 10 to 20 years to recover fully from the crisis. Rogoff says the massive central bank injections of cash should be seen as an insurance policy against slipping back into recession. The thing that makes the road back so difficult, he says, is the large hangover of consumer and government debt., &ldquo; You can lower the interest rate by sort of engineering it down to kind of try to get the people downstream to borrow more. But if they're not interested in borrowing, I think you ought be trying to get the bankers to lend more., - Peter Fisher, BlackRock, Here's one way to think about what's happening: The central banks have filled a huge reservoir with cash; they actually call it liquidity. But it's not having the desired effect, Rogoff says., The pool is stagnant, and we're not getting healthy from one part of the economy to the other, he says., That's because there's a huge dam blocking the flow into the economic river below. That dam is partly made of debt, says Noah Wilcox, president of Grand Rapids State Bank, a small bank in the logging and mining area of northeastern Minnesota., Wilcox says the debt hangover is blocking the demand for consumer loans., You've got a lot of people who are underwater in the homes, he says. They may want to buy new house or go buy a new car, or do something like that. But the problem is they are underwater, and they just want to sit tight, and that just depresses consumer loan demand., Consumers are already underwater in debt. Why would they want another loan from the giant reservoir of money the central banks have created?, There are other reasons that central bank cash isn't turning into loans that could boost the economy. Uncertainty about the outcome of the election and the fiscal cliff has businesses paralyzed, Wilcox says. He also says the Fed has pushed rates so low it's much harder for banks to make a profit., It's definitely less profitable for us to make loans today, he says., Indeed, the difference between the interest rate the bank pays the folks in Grand Rapids, Minn., for their deposits, and the rates it can charge for business and home and car loans has narrowed. That reduces the incentive for banks to lend, says Peter Fisher of the Wall Street financial firm BlackRock., How hard are the bankers going to work lending? he says. You can lower the interest rate by sort of engineering it down to kind of try to get the people downstream to borrow more. But if they're not interested in borrowing, I think you ought be trying to get the bankers to lend more., If you keep pushing rates lower, Fisher says, you discourage lending. It's just not worth the risk of giving someone a loan if your return is too low. In fact, Fisher says he believes the most dangerous unintended consequence of the Fed's low rate policy is that instead of boosting lending and the flow of money through the economy, it's restricting the flow.
Kansas farmer Luke Ulrich pilots his combine through the last eight rows of this year's ragged crop, which produced far less than half the normal yield., After one of the driest summers on record, recent rains have helped in some parts of the country. But overall, the drought has still intensified. The latest tracking classifies more than a fifth of the contiguous United States in extreme or exceptional drought, the worst ratings., In some parts of the Lower Midwest, water-starved crops have collapsed, but the farmers have not. Farmers across the country are surviving, and many are even thriving. This year, despite the dismal season, farmers stand to make exceptionally good money, according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture., Here in 2012, USDA expects net farm incomes to reach their second-highest level on record, says Jason Henderson of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City., There are a few reasons for these incredible gains after the brutal drought. For one, with fewer crops being produced, the prices of those crops skyrocketed., Crop prices, grain prices, oilseed prices, wheat prices prices are very, very high, says Dave Swenson, who teaches economics at Iowa State University., Swenson says that farmers relatively unscathed by the drought, through irrigation or good luck, are having a banner year., The dairy Eric Neill and his wife operate in Freeman, Mo., nearly went under this summer, crushed by high feed prices from drought-scarce grains. The farm was saved by restorative rains brought by Hurricane Isaac., The dairy Eric Neill and his wife operate in Freeman, Mo., nearly went under this summer, crushed by high feed prices from drought-scarce grains. The farm was saved by restorative rains brought by Hurricane Isaac., The Good And Bad Of High Grain Prices, Roy Berghaus, who farms the hills near Farmington, Mo., figures he'll make ends meet, harvesting only a third of his normal corn crop., Price is the only salvation, he says. Hopefully it will keep the operation going., While those high crop prices meant deliverance for some, farmers with animals got the worst of the drought this year as feed grew scarce and extremely expensive., I honestly probably wanted to quit several times, just hang it up, dairy farmer Julie Neill of Freeman, Mo., says of the trying summer months. But there was a lot to that decision. It was giving up a lifetime of everything that we have made., These days, Neill and Sons Dairy looks pretty lush after a rain, with happy cows crowding together for a drink of fresh water. But all summer, Neill watched the pastures wither and the business unwind. The Neills had to borrow heavily, about $50,000, just to keep their cows alive. Neighbors lent encouragement, and heavy equipment. The farm was in intensive care., Honestly, I think it was more on death row, Neill says. It just didn't feel like it was ever going to end., For the Neills, relief came as the remnants of Hurricane Isaac the storm that slammed Louisiana last month quenched large parts of Arkansas and Missouri., We had 5 1/4 inches of rain here, says Neill's husband, Eric. We had no runoff. Within four days, we had grass growing, and the cows started grazing again., Today, Neill's cows stand in a field of bright green, knee-high grass, gobbling their fill and making milk., With far less than half of their normal corn yield, the Ulrich brothers are relying in part on government-subsidized crop insurance to keep their farm afloat., With far less than half of their normal corn yield, the Ulrich brothers are relying in part on government-subsidized crop insurance to keep their farm afloat., New Hybrids And Good Old Insurance, But 45 miles west of Neill and Sons, near Baldwin City, Kan., Isaac petered out, bringing too little rain too late in the season to help Luke Ulrich's corn crop., As Ulrich pilots his big, green combine, harvesting the last eight rows of this year's ragged crop, it amounts to far less than half the normal yield typical of what farmers are pulling in across the Lower Midwest where drought destroyed billions of bushels of corn., Ulrich and his brother Jordan are looking to government-subsidized crop insurance to help make up for some of the havoc the drought wreaked on their farm. The insurance, which most Corn Belt farmers carry, is another major boost for farm income: It will likely pay out upward of $15 billion this year., Definitely the crop insurance helps, but everybody's situation's different, Jordan Ulrich says., The crop insurance will only help the Ulrich brothers so much, because they have especially high overhead: They rent farm land and carry a lot of debt. Crop insurance won't pay the mortgage, though the USDA is offering very low interest emergency loans for farmers in their situation., But Luke Ulrich says there's another way they're staying afloat: newer hybrid soybeans that hung on and are expected to produce a fairly decent and very lucrative crop. The only bright spot, and I use that term loosely, [is] we can't figure out how these soybeans stayed alive, he says., While the drought is far from over, U.S. agriculture seems to be coping better than expected. Farmers aren't being forced off the land in huge numbers, and many will go into next year with the tools they need to keep producing enormous amounts of food, weather permitting.
American Airlines planes sit on the tarmac at Miami International Airport this month. Reports indicate that American Airlines has canceled somewhere between 2 and 5 percent of flights in recent days, reportedly blaming a surge in pilot sick days and maintenance write-ups by pilots., Pat Henneberry is an airline's dream customer. She flies all week, every week, and buying an $800 ticket so that she can have full flexibility is standard operating procedure. She's an American Airlines platinum customer. But she is fed up with the endless delays and cancellations., On Monday I didn't get on the plane. Basically, they said they're going to be late, then an hour later they said they're canceling. It's a direct flight to Chicago. It's easy to get equipment. They said it was maintenance. It was definitely a big, huge red flag that they're canceling, because they don't have any pilots to fly any planes, she says., Henneberry says that not making her meetings is not an option., Next week I have five flights that I'm on with American. If I don't get where I'm going I own my own business I don't get paid, she says., American has been forced to cancel hundreds of flights, and its on-time performance has collapsed to a little more than 50 percent. The airline says its pilots are to blame., We're talking about write-ups for things like broken coffee pots, inoperative passenger reading lights and torn seat pockets that are causing delays. They're calling maintenance out to have those things checked and are causing delays. And those were up more than 34 percent, American spokesman Bruce Hicks says., In 2003, with American on the verge of collapse, the pilots, mechanics, ground crew and flight attendants gave back nearly $2 billion in concessions. Later, it emerged that the airline's top managers quietly awarded themselves millions in bonuses, and tens of millions more when they retired. The workers have never really gotten over that betrayal., The history is the history, Hicks says. The fact is that all of our labor groups and management and non-union groups in 2003 made significant concessions to keep American Airlines out of bankruptcy. And we worked very hard to stay out of bankruptcy, but in fact we lost $10 billion over the next 10 years $10 billion., On Wednesday night, it looked like there was progress. The pilots met and voted to go back to the bargaining table. After all, they've been without a contract since 2003 and are still working at their 1993 pay rates. But after the vote, a letter arrived from American management threatening to take the union to court if the pilots didn't stop delaying flights., Within 24 hours of being invited back to the bargaining table by this management team, they fired off a letter that essentially threatens legal action against the pilots, says Tom Hoban, who flies a 777 for American and is an officer in the union. In that regard, it's like a baseball bat with an olive branch wrapped around it, and they just hit us up the side of the head here. It just doesn't make any sense., Now the pilots are furious; they see executive duplicity once again. And as of Thursday afternoon, they're not going back to the bargaining table. Instead, they're meeting with their lawyers about management's letter., This corporation has taken this airline from first to worst. There simply is no faith in the current leadership of this management team, which is why we're pressing hard for a merger with US Airways and a change in leadership, Hoban says., And what's American Airlines customer Pat Henneberry going to do?, I won't happily go back at this point. I have lived through a few of these with American Airlines. And to be honest, I'm having an incredible experience on Delta. You know, I have to do business, she says., Delta Airlines has cleverly matched the platinum status Henneberry has with American. So while American management fights to the death with its pilots union, its best customers are wandering off.
We thought the U.S. economy added just under 2 million jobs between March, 2011 and March, 2012. Turns out, the actual number was more like 2.4 million a big difference!, This means, of course, that the jobs picture over the year was not quite as bleak as we thought. On a more meta level, it's also an important reminder that the monthly jobs number, which is pounced on the minute it comes out and parsed with analytical fury, is actually just a rough estimate that maybe doesn't deserve all that hyperactive analysis., The latest monthly jobs report was a disappointment, we were told, because the economy added only 96,000 jobs in August. That was far fewer than the 120,000 economists had predicted., In fact, though, the true number of jobs the added that month might well have been more than 120,000 (or, for that matter, fewer than 65,000). The jobs number is based on a survey, which, like any survey, has a margin of error., A few times a year, the government updates the jobs numbers using data from state unemployment offices, which is much more accurate than the national monthly jobs survey (but takes longer to collect). That's the set of numbers that was released today. In the year through March, according to the latest update, the economy added 386,000 more jobs than earlier surveys suggested.
A huge drop in demand for cars, aircraft and other transportation equipment pulled down orders for so-called durable goods in August, the Census Bureau says., Orders fell 13.2 percent, the largest decrease since January 2009., Also this morning, the Bureau of Economic Analysis revised down its estimate of second-quarter gross domestic product growth. It now says GDP grew at a tepid 1.3 percent annual rate in the quarter, not the previous estimate of 1.7 percent., GDP grew at a 2 percent annual rate in the first quarter., The one bright spot in this morning's economic news: There were 26,000 fewer first-time claims for unemployment insurance last week vs. the week before. The Employment and Training Administration says there were 359,000 such filings., Bloomberg News sifts through the reports and concludes that the news on orders for durable goods signals that:, Manufacturing once a pillar of the economic recovery, has cooled, hurting companies such as Caterpillar Inc. as concern about the fiscal cliff of tax increases and government spending cuts that may take effect next year causes businesses to pull back. Slowing growth from Europe to China also is putting a dent on exports, another headwind for American factories.
SoloPower is betting it will succeed where others have failed with a $197 million loan from the Department of Energy., SoloPower is betting it will succeed where others have failed with a $197 million loan from the Department of Energy., A small solar power company hopes to become a winner in a market littered with losers., San Jose, Calif.-based SoloPower is opening a $60 million manufacturing facility in Portland, Ore., Thursday as it works toward receiving a major government loan like the one given to now-bankrupt Solyndra. SoloPower thinks it has a strategy to succeed where Solyndra failed., SoloPower makes a niche product in a highly competitive market. It's a lightweight and flexible solar panel, uniquely designed for commercial and industrial rooftops that can't bear the weight of the older, heavy traditional modules, says CEO Tim Harris., Customers really like our product, he says. They like the fact that we understand how to design it for the lowest cost of installation., SoloPower has to get its Portland plant up and running, and meet other undisclosed benchmarks before it can tap into a Department of Energy loan of $197 million. If all goes as planned, that will happen within a year., 'Unproven, Untested', Some industry analysts are skeptical, though, including Matt Feinstein of Boston-based Lux Research. He says SoloPower depends on prices that are too premium for its product., I don't believe it's a sound strategy without a significant gain in performance, and right now, we don't think SoloPower has that performance advantage over the incumbents, Feinstein says., The incumbents Feinstein refers to are Chinese competitors., Another analyst, Shyam Mehta of GTM Research in New York, says SoloPower has a niche product, but he wonders about the size of its target market., Their technology is completely unique, and the performance of their panels in the field is pretty much unknown at this point, he says. So they have unproven, untested technology in terms of the power output., But SoloPower's CEO disputes that, saying demand for his product is high, particularly overseas, outstripping ability to make it., In Solyndra's Shadow, Still, SoloPower can't escape the comparisons with Solyndra. That company had potential, too, but industry post-mortems blame Solyndra's bankruptcy on its business model, including high production costs., Solyndra had more than $1 billion in private investment, but it also drew down half a billion dollars in federal loans without ever turning a profit., On the other hand, SoloPower has raised $219 million in private capital. One of its key investors, John Cavalier, co-managing partner of Hudson Clean Energy, says taxpayers should know that the company won't touch any federal money until it proves to be viable., We have not done so to date, and we will not do so until there is every confidence that everyone will view the loan to SoloPower as a very prudent investment in the company, he says., With the loan, SoloPower gets at least two things: the capital to ramp up new lines of production creating possibly 400 new jobs and $197 million worth of more scrutiny.
Donna Summer in 1976. YouTube's Chris Maxcy says the company targets advertising to videos by artists like her and gives a share of the revenue from it to the track's label and publisher., Donna Summer in 1976. YouTube's Chris Maxcy says the company targets advertising to videos by artists like her and gives a share of the revenue from it to the track's label and publisher., YouTube is well-known for videos, but a recent Nielsen study revealed 64 percent of teens and young adults go to it to listen to and discover music. The free website, which is owned by Google, has set up advertising deals to help musicians get compensated. But it's not clear how they're getting paid or how much., It's a safe bet that many of San Francisco State University's 25,000 students are music fans. Zachariah Bargouti says if there's an Internet connection even on the subway there's YouTube., It even works under the Transbay Tube, he says, talking about the portion of the BART that runs underneath San Francisco Bay. I still have 3G and I can usually listen to something on YouTube., That's why Bargouti says he doesn't really buy music anymore. Neither does Arianna Caramat. I stopped with the downloading of artists on iTunes, she says. I just find that it's easier more convenient to, like, listen to online radio., The 22-year-old Caramat uses Pandora to find new music. She discovered disco there. And when she really likes a song, like Donna Summer's I Feel Love, she goes to YouTube., To its credit, YouTube is trying to help Summer's estate make some money. Chris Maxcy, the company's partner development director for music, spends his days working with labels and music publishers to license music for YouTube. If you were to look at each month, he says, we are paying out tens of millions of dollars to the industry., Maxcy says YouTube is paying the labels and the song writers a percentage of the revenue from advertising attached to videos like I Feel Love., When that video is played on our site, we target advertising to it, he says. Then we give the labels and the publishers a share of the advertising., When I watch the Summer video, an ad pops up at the bottom for Hive whose slogan is Modern design for the home. Google, which owns YouTube, has clearly figured out that I like modern furniture based on my other browsing habits. But it is not always clear how much Summer and her label will make from an ad targeted to me, compared with one aimed at a 22-year-old college student., If you're Proctor &amp; Gamble you might find a particular demographic more appealing, says Maxcy. So you might find moms more appealing than teenage boys. I think there's so many variables that go into ultimately what the artist makes off of that advertising. In other words, Proctor &amp; Gamble might pay more for an ad on YouTube than the makers of Halo., Holiday in Cambodia by the punk band Dead Kennedys has been streamed on YouTube over 2.5 million times. Guitarist Raymond Pepperell also known as East Bay Ray says, overall, Dead Kennedys videos have been watched about 14 million times. But the band has only seen a few hundred dollars., I don't know and no one I know knows how YouTube calculates the money, he says. Pepperell says the band has been in talks with YouTube, and the company told the musicians that the site takes 45 percent of ad revenue generated by their videos. But, he says, YouTube won't tell them how much that is., What YouTube claims is irrelevant until they produce how much they've made off my band and how much they've shared with my band, he says. Don't let them bull s- - - you that it's too complicated., But other musicians say they've seen benefits from YouTube even if they haven't seen much money., OK Go was a little-known band until it released a video shot in lead singer Damian Kulash's backyard. The band's videos have been viewed upwards of 200 million times, according to their manager, Jamie Kitman. He says he can't reveal how much the band made, but, he says, If that was your only source of revenue, you know, it would be time not only to not quit your day job but time to get a night job to supplement it., Kitman says OK Go gets most of its income from iTunes downloads, licensing to movies, TV shows and commercials, and touring., Pepperell would like those young people enjoying his music on YouTube to think harder about it. They should ask YouTube and Google to pay the artists, he says. And, yes, the students are getting free music but they should still care., Pepperell says all he knows is that his income has gone down by half in the past couple of years.
In January, NPR and ProPublica reported on a potential conflict of interest at Freddie Mac, a mortgage giant sponsored by the federal government. The stories noted that even as Freddie Mac was writing rules making it harder for homeowners to refinance their mortgages, it also was stepping up investments in securities that gain when homeowners remain stuck in high-rate loans., Today, a federal Inspector General released a report that evaluated those investments and concluded they were just a small portion of the portfolio held by Freddie, formally called the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. Moreover, the inspector found no evidence that Freddie obstructed homeowners' abilities to refinance their mortgages in an effort to influence the profitability of the investments, known as inverse floaters., The NPR and ProPublica reports underlined the potential for a conflict within Freddie Mac. On one hand, the government-sponsored enterprise holds investments that make money when homeowners are unable to refinance. And on the other hand, it has a public mission to make homeownership more affordable. The stories did not assert that Freddie had specifically changed its refinance policies to boost the value of its inverse floaters., The inspector general's examination, which relied on the word of the Freddie employees it interviewed, found no evidence of improper collusion between Freddie's investment side and its mortgage-credit side., It also said the Federal Housing Finance Agency, which oversees Freddie Mac, made ambiguous public statements about the investment strategy. Those statements could have been more clearly articulated, it said., The inspector general's report was requested by Sen. Robert Menendez (D-NJ).
Model homes at a new development in Millbrae, Calif., earlier this year., Model homes at a new development in Millbrae, Calif., earlier this year., While the number of new homes sold in August was barely changed from July, the median sales price was up sharply, the Census Bureau and Department of Housing and Urban Development report. So the news adds to other recent signs, including Tuesday's report about higher home prices in major cities, of a recovering housing sector., According to the report, new homes sold at an annual rate of 373,000 last month vs. 374,000 in July. The median sales price, though, was $256,900. That was up 11.2 percent from the month before.
For many who work in the food service industry, coffee can make or break their day, according to a new survey. Many scientists and sales reps also said their day suffers if they don't have a cup., For many who work in the food service industry, coffee can make or break their day, according to a new survey. Many scientists and sales reps also said their day suffers if they don't have a cup., Cooks and servers, scientists and sales reps those are some of the workers who say they do better after drinking coffee, according to a new study. Nurses, journalists, teachers, and business executives also said they're more effective at work if they have coffee, in a survey commissioned by Dunkin Donuts and CareerBuilder., In the survey of 4,100 workers nationwide, a higher percentage of women than men said their job performance suffers without coffee, by a 47-40 percent margin. Even more young workers said the same thing, with 62 percent of those between ages 18 and 24 saying they need coffee to work, and 58 percent of workers between 25 and 34 saying the same., Maybe a lot of those young folks are working in the restaurant industry. Here are the rankings by professions:, In the survey, 43 percent of workers said they don't get as much done if they don't have at least one cup of coffee. And some don't stop at one cup, as 63 percent of coffee drinkers say they have at least two cups on the days they work. More than a quarter (28 percent) said they drink at least three cups., But that's not to suggest all of these folks are just amped up on caffeine, multitasking on the energy they get from coffee. Because in last year's study, the single benefit reported by the most respondents 20 percent was that coffee gave them a chance to network and socialize with their peers., There's a reason why coffee is a staple in the workplace, according to CareerBuilder communications vice president Cynthia McIntyre. Workers report that coffee fuels higher energy and productivity, and serves as a means to socialize with colleagues., And coffee has other benefits, such as the much-cited finding that women who drink coffee are less likely to suffer from depression, as a study that was updated last year found. Similar results have been reported for men. An earlier version of that study, in 1996, found an inverse association between coffee consumption and the risk of suicide., The Dunkin Donuts survey, which is conducted annually, is timed to coincide with National Coffee Day (this Saturday). If you plan to celebrate with a cup, you might want to check out NPR's Allison Aubrey's video on tasting coffee., In last year's coffee survey, scientists and lab technicians took the top spot, while third place went to education administrator. And as was the case last year, the Northeast led the way in coffee consumption this year, with 64 percent of workers in the region reportedly having at least one cup a day.
Job seekers fill out applications Aug. 21 at a construction job fair in New York. Polls show voters want the presidential candidates to provide more details on how they would reduce unemployment, change tax policy and alter government spending., Job seekers fill out applications Aug. 21 at a construction job fair in New York. Polls show voters want the presidential candidates to provide more details on how they would reduce unemployment, change tax policy and alter government spending., As this presidential election year was kicking off, strategists were saying the focus would be on the economy. But now even as absentee ballots are being filled in the candidates are still dodging details about how to improve growth., President Obama doesn't have a plan, says Kevin Hassett, an economic adviser to Republican candidate Mitt Romney., Jeffrey Liebman, an economic adviser to President Obama, says Romney has revealed no plan other than going back to the failed policies of the past decade., One independent economist, David Pritchett, who used to work for the International Monetary Fund, listened Monday as the two advisers debated economic policy at the National Press Club in Washington. His verdict: There should be more specifics., This would seem to be a good time for the candidates to reveal more of their plans. Most voters remain deeply worried about the economy, and many have not yet decided who would do a better job of fixing it., A national CNBC poll released Tuesday shows 55 percent of the 800 Americans surveyed say the economy is worse now than when Obama's term began. But there is no clear majority for which candidate would do a better job of fixing the economy in the future., The poll showed 43 percent say Obama would do a better job, compared with 34 percent for Romney. But a huge chunk of voters 22 percent say they simply don't know who would do a better job with the economy in the future., Other polls show voters want the candidates to provide more details on how they would reduce unemployment, change tax policy and alter government spending. But they aren't getting much., During an interview aired Sunday by CBS's 60 Minutes, Romney declined to specify which tax deductions and exemptions he would eliminate to make it possible to lower tax rates. When asked for clarity, he said: Well, that's something Congress and I will have to work out together., On the same news show, Obama was pushed to explain why the unemployment rate remains above 8 percent. His response was that the hole was so deep when we got in [office] that we lost 9 million jobs. We've created 4.6 [million]., On Monday, a debate on the candidates' economic plans was sponsored by the National Association for Business Economics. The event, held at the National Press Club, featured Hassett and Liebman. Both agreed the No. 1 problem for businesses is the lack of customers. Insufficient demand, for sure, Hassett said., But they disagreed over how to stimulate demand for goods and services. Liebman talked up Obama's support for a jobs bill to create more work for teachers, firefighters and construction workers. By spending more on infrastructure, schools and public safety, the government could spur consumer demand, Liebman said., If tax rates for the wealthy go back to the same rate as [under] President Clinton, you can create enough revenue to bring the deficit down and you don't have to whack the middle class, Liebman said., Hassett said Obama's deficit-reduction plan is built on phantom savings., Romney would cut taxes for everyone, including the wealthiest, and pay for the cuts by controlling spending, Hassett said. But he would not specify which one cutting spending or lowering tax rates would be the higher priority for Romney. He said he had not directly discussed that topic with the candidate., The lack of specifics may be a good indicator of just how tough the problems are. Congress already has spent vast amounts on economic stimulus programs to create jobs. It has bailed out banks and shored up automakers and reduced taxes., Now, going forward, the White House and Congress must move toward making much more painful choices involving spending and taxes to reduce deficits., I don't see any basis for optimism, Pritchett said after listening to the debate. The choices will be so difficult, no elected leader will want to make them. There already are so many lines drawn in the sand that I don't see how you get to compromises, he said., Though lots of details must still be filled in, here are the key points each candidate has made:, ROMNEY, &mdash; Boost domestic fossil fuel production., &mdash; Improve education by increasing school choice and changing teacher evaluations., &mdash; Expand international trade while curtailing unfair trade policies, particularly those involving China., &mdash; Cut federal spending., &mdash; Repeal the Affordable Health Care Act, supported by Democrats, who are likely to retain control of the Senate. Romney says he would allow each state to craft its own specific plan for expanding health care coverage., &mdash; Repeal the Dodd-Frank financial regulation law and replace it with more streamlined rules for Wall Street., OBAMA, &mdash; Create 1 million manufacturing jobs and expand exports., &mdash; Push Congress to invest more in infrastructure projects to create jobs., &mdash; Make education a national mission and increase job training., &mdash; Create a tax code that makes sure everybody pays their fair share, including tax increases for those earning over $250,000 a year., &mdash; Reduce federal debt by $4 trillion over one decade., &mdash; Eliminate tax breaks for companies that send jobs overseas.
A home for sale in Los Angeles last month., A home for sale in Los Angeles last month., Home prices rose in July from June by 1.5 percent in its 10-city index and 1.6 percent in the 20 major cities where it tracks changes, the latest S&P;/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices report shows., According to the report:, For the third consecutive month, all 20 cities and both composites recorded positive monthly changes. It would have been a fourth had prices not fallen by 0.6% in Detroit back in April., All in all, we are more optimistic about housing. Upbeat trends continue, says economist David Blitzer, the chairman of the index committee at S&P; Dow Jones Indices.
Traders work in the bond pit at the Chicago Board of Trade in 1995. In recent decades, much of the trading has left the pits and gone electronic., Traders work in the bond pit at the Chicago Board of Trade in 1995. In recent decades, much of the trading has left the pits and gone electronic., The trading pits at the Chicago Board of Trade and the Mercantile Exchange have long been potent symbols of American capitalism. And they used to be as rough and tumble as the city itself, where burly men bought and sold commodities like hogs, cattle, corn and soybeans., Trading volume has gone up considerably in recent years, but Chicago's trading pits are tamer places today the result of a revolution futures trading has undergone over the past quarter century. Much of the trading has left the pits and gone electronic., In the hurly-burly of the trading pit, traders use shouts and hand signals to make their deals. The signals developed over time from the mid-19th century, when the Chicago Board of Trade was established., As electronic trading replaces the open outcry system of the trading pits, the hand signals are edging toward obsolescence. Some exchanges have closed derivatives trading pits altogether, and it may only be a matter of time before open outcry becomes a thing of the past. Trading Pit History has galleries that show the hand signals., In the chaos of the trading pit, traders would do what they could to get an extra edge. One man even sold men's platform shoes, which gave traders up to 3 extra inches to get above the crowd. But the company that made the shoes, B.A. Mason, discontinued them when sales shrank., &mdash; Christopher Connelly, Thirty years ago, if the country were in the middle of a historic drought as it is today, the corn options pit on the floor of the Chicago Board of Trade would have been the center of the action. But instead, it's pretty quiet., The volume as far as yelling and screaming was much, much louder, says Chicago trader Scott Shellady. You almost couldn't hear yourself think., He says the scene when he started trading in the 1980s was barely controlled chaos., All of those pits would have been teeming with people, Shellady says. Much to the point where I would leave at the end of the day and I would have the sweat from the back of the man in front of me on my chest, and the sweat from my back on the chest of the guy standing behind me. That's how tight we were, we had to hold our hands over our heads., Now, there are fewer traders and less clerical staff. There's also less paper: Today, the most popular way to get information is tablet computers. Shellady says it has made things are more civilized. Gone are the days when traders had to fight to place their orders., Shellady says he felt like an athlete taking to the field when he walked onto the trading floor. Now, he says, it's much less athletic, and the traders actually look different., Back then you would be recruited because you were 6 foot 6 and had long arms and had a big voice, Shellady says. The type of trader has changed so now we have got more slight, more academic, smarter kids from MIT and Harvard and Yale, when we used to have football players from Illinois and Michigan and Notre Dame., The Board of Trade and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the two biggest exchanges in Chicago, merged in 2007 to form the CME group. They operate out of the old Board of Trade building., Although many have predicted computerization would mean the demise of open outcry trading in Chicago, Shellady says that some traders' expertise can't be replaced by a screen, at least not yet. For example, packaging a variety of derivatives is still hard to do on a computer, he says., Voice to voice down here, looking at people, it's much easier to get it done that way, Shellady says. So you'll find that a lot of those things are still done open outcry. And the easy stuff ... you'll find that that stuff goes on the screen., If you ask the traders when open outcry will go away, some say never; some say five years from now. But they've been saying five years from now for over 20 years.
The Other White Meat slogan has been a popular promotion for pork since the 1980s. But a recent lawsuit raises questions about who owns it and who pays., The Other White Meat slogan has been a popular promotion for pork since the 1980s. But a recent lawsuit raises questions about who owns it and who pays., You know that ad campaign for pork, the one that called it the other white meat? There's a fascinating behind-the-scenes story about that slogan, revealed in a new lawsuit that was just filed this morning by the Humane Society of the United States., The complaint claims that the National Pork Producers Council (NPPC), which ran that ad campaign from 1986 to 2001, has been financing its lobbying efforts in part through the sale of that slogan, at the wildly inflated price of $60 million, back in 2006. (According to the lawsuit, an economist at the time thought that use of the slogan was worth no more than $375,000 a year. And there's an argument that the NPPC didn't have the right to claim that it owned that slogan in the first place.), So who paid $60 million for the slogan?, You could say it was pork producers. The money came out of their pockets. But it was collected from them by the U.S. Department of Agriculture as part of a so-called checkoff program. Under these programs, which also exist for beef, soybeans, and milk, the USDA collects mandatory fees from farmers and uses the money to promote those products. (Many farmers resent these tax-like fees and have mounted legal challenges to them, but the USDA argues that they're good for business.), On the other hand, the USDA didn't decide that this slogan was worth $60 million. It just turns checkoff money over to industry groups. In this case, it was the National Pork Board, a collection of people from the pork industry, who agreed that $60 million was a fair price according to the lawsuit, as a way to keep their good friends at the National Pork Producers Council in business., I won't go into all the juicy details of the story. Read the lawsuit for yourself. And remember, this all comes from the Humane Society, which would love nothing better than to bankrupt the National Pork Producers Council., In its response, the NPPC accused the HSUS of bullying tactics and asserted that there is no legal merit to this claim., But the lawsuit does shed a little spotlight on what makes the so-called checkoff programs so odd and controversial. They mix up public and private priorities so thoroughly that at the end of the day you have the distinct impression that somebody is getting scammed, but you can't quite tell who it is. Is it the farmers? The government? The Pork Board?, Parke Wilde, a specialist on U.S. food policy at Tufts University, thinks that the checkoff programs are doing their worst damage to the credibility of the government's own policies on nutrition. He writes on his blog that the U.S. government, by sponsoring contradictory messages for different commodities while approving each message as government speech serves consumers poorly. For example, through the soybean program, the government sponsors ads promoting soy milk; through the milk program, it casts scorn on the same product.
Ad Age just unveiled its top 10 female ad icons of all time list:, Flo's an icon, the folks at Ad Age say., &mdash; Morton Salt's 'umbrella girl, &mdash; Betty Crocker, &mdash; Miss Chiquita, &mdash; Rosie the Riveter, &mdash; Josephine the Plumber (Comet cleanser), &mdash; Mrs. Olson (for Folgers coffee), &mdash; Madge the manicurist (Palmolive soap), &mdash; Rosie the waitress (Bounty paper towels), &mdash; Clara Peller (Wendy's where's the beef? lady), &mdash; Flo (for Progressive insurance), Flo seems too new to have made the list, in our humble opinion. Especially since among those who didn't crack the top 10 are:, &mdash; Little Debbie, &mdash; Elsie the cow (Borden milk), &mdash; The Ivory soap baby (no, porn star Marilyn Chambers was never the baby, but Snopes.com says she was one of the mothers on the soapbox), &mdash; Aunt Jemima, &mdash; Mrs. Butterworth, Who else is missing? Suggestions are welcome in the comments thread., Update at 3 p.m. ET. Some Excellent Suggestions., From the comments thread:, &mdash; Winfield Scott offers eight., 1.) Mother Nature, played by Dena Dietrich on the Chiffon margarine commercials in the '70s and '80s... It's not nice to fool mother nature!, 2.) The Coppertone Girl, 3.) The Doublemint Twins, 4.) The Gerber Baby (Drawn by Dorothy H. Smith of her neighbor's baby, Ann Turner.), 5.) Wendy (of Wendy's Hamburgers fame), 6.) The Sun Maid Raisin Girl, 7.) Sarah Tucker for Cool Whip, played in the '60s by Marge Redmond, 8.) The Sunbeam Bread Girl, &mdash; Several readers mention the Pine-Sol lady., &mdash; Several also reminded us about Land O'Lakes butter's Native American woman., &mdash; Kathy Moberg thinks the Sun-Maid raisin girl should be on the list., &mdash; Art Aficionado nominates the St. Pauli girl., Keep checking the comments. We bet there will be more.
First of a two-part series, Spend time watching TV in Colorado Springs, Colo., and you'll feel as though Mitt Romney and Barack Obama are King Kong and Godzilla, planted at the foot of the Front Range mountains for an epic fight that still has seven weeks to go. This city is home to fewer than half a million people, yet campaign spending here has tripled since 2008, landing it among the top 10 advertising markets in the country., Colorado Springs provides a telling glimpse into the impact that political ads are having across the country in a year when the candidates and outside groups have blasted through every previous spending record., Kyle Blakeley owns a local advertising company that bears his name. During campaign season four years ago, he went to a local TV news station and asked to buy a 30-second ad that would typically cost $300 to $500., &ldquo; The thing about a television station it's a finite supply. This is classic economics, right? Supply and demand theory. I've got so many parking spots, it's a race to see who gets 'em., - Missy Evanson, general sales manager, KMGH TV Denver, They were talking to us about needing to pay $1,500 for that spot. But they had a national campaign come in at the last minute with some money and pay $7,000 for that spot, Blakeley says. That's 14 times the standard price., That's pretty typical, says political scientist Robin Kolodny. She studies campaign ad spending at Temple University in Philadelphia. In 2006, when I did all the data gathering, a 30-second spot on the Philadelphia Eagles game was $65,000., Broadcasters know there is a small window of time when they can charge a premium and campaigns will pay it. Campaigns have to get rid of their cash, because it will be useless the day after an election., And those eye-popping examples are from past campaigns. This year everything is supersized except for the number of swing states in play. So a bigger pot of money is getting pumped into a smaller pool of states., A Focus On Second-Tier Ad Markets, I've been someone who always sort of pooh-poohs 'this is the record year,' says Ken Goldstein of Kantar Media, which tracks political ad spending. But this really is a year when there is such focus on relatively few markets that the levels of advertising we're seeing are really uncharted waters., Goldstein's firm did some research exclusively for NPR and PBS NewsHour. The data show that last week in Colorado Springs, political advertisers spent more than $300,000. That's three times what they spent during the same period in 2008. And the pattern is true of second-tier media markets across the country., In Dayton, Ohio, since the beginning of the general election, ad spending has tripled compared with 2008., In Cedar Rapids, Iowa, political advertisers have spent six times what they did in 2008., In Richmond, Va., the increase is tenfold., And the jump in these second-tier markets is much bigger than the national jump. Across the country, ad spending has about doubled since the last election. Even adjusting for the fact that fewer swing states are sharing a bigger pot of money, it seems that second-tier cities are getting much more attention than usual., &ldquo; I've been someone who always sort of pooh-poohs 'This is the record year.' But this really is a year when there is such focus on relatively few markets that the levels of advertising we're seeing are really uncharted waters., - Ken Goldstein, president, Kantar Media's Campaign Media Analysis Group, Colorado Springs is not an obvious place for all of this presidential action. Republicans outnumber Democrats in El Paso County more than 2 to 1. Barack Obama lost this part of Colorado to John McCain by 19 points in 2008., It's not a matter of just winning; it's winning by how much, says Rich Beeson, a fifth-generation Coloradan and political director for the Romney campaign., Presidential campaigns know exactly the margin of victory or defeat that they have to hit in each town in order to carry an entire state. Democratic media strategist Tad Devine says campaigns set extremely specific goals based on hard data., Once those numbers, once the vote goals are developed, then the campaign sets out in a lot of different ways at the grass-roots level, by organizing door to door, at the communications and advertising level, by broadcast media like television advertising to achieve those goals., Democrats Outspending Republicans , Although no one suggests that President Obama will win Colorado Springs, whether he loses it by 15 or 25 points could determine whether he carries Colorado., Beeson of the Romney campaign says smaller cities are vital to this chess game, especially since they're cheaper to advertise in., A lot of secondary markets are very key to the overall map, whether it's a Charlottesville in Virginia or a Colorado Springs in Colorado, he says. You can't ever cede the ground to anyone., But in many swing states this year, Republicans have ceded ground to the Democrats., These ads, from both the Romney Campaign and the Obama Campaign, are being aired frequently in Colorado television markets.According to Kantar Media research conducted for NPR, the Romney campaign spent about $425,000 advertising in Colorado last week. The Obama campaign spent more than twice that amount., Take Colorado. According to new research conducted for NPR and NewsHour by Kantar Media, last week the Romney campaign spent about $425,000 advertising in the state. The Obama campaign spent more than twice that amount. Outside Republican groups helped close the gap in Colorado a bit, but even factoring in all of the outside groups' political ads, Democrats outspent Republicans in the state last week by about 25 percent., And that pattern of Democrats outspending Republicans has been true in other swing states, during other weeks., All of this spending means that if you work at a local TV station in a swing state right now, you are very lucky and very busy., At the local ABC affiliate in Denver, Missy Evanson can look at the polls on a Monday and predict how much her phone will be ringing for the rest of the week., The thing about a television station, she says, it's a finite supply. This is classic economics, right? Supply and demand theory: I've got so many parking spots, it's a race to see who gets 'em., Over the third quarter June, July and August of this year her station's ad revenues have doubled every month. And she says it's still growing exponentially., September will double August, and then ... in the month of October, in one month, we will have a million more dollars than what we had in the entire quarter., Being 'More Creative' When The Circus Comes To Town, That extra money is not exactly a stimulus package for the community. It's a buffer that the stations count on for the off years, says Evanson., The very next year is extremely tough for us, she says. The way that we will negotiate annual business and quarterly business next year is going to be a complete 180 from what we did this year., If the newsroom wants a new satellite truck or camera equipment during an off year, station managers will say, Wait until election season. That's a luxury of operating a TV station in a swing state. Stations in solidly red or blue states are out of luck., But it can be tricky to count on the money coming in during an election, since the swing state map is always in flux. Pennsylvania was one of the most heavily contested states in 2008. This year, political ad spending is virtually nil there. North Carolina wasn't considered a swing state until Barack Obama squeaked out a win in 2008. Now it's one of the lucky few awash in millions of political advertising dollars. Wisconsin saw almost no political advertising early this year, but after Wisconsin Rep. Paul Ryan entered the race as Mitt Romney's running mate, both campaigns started spending there., For local advertisers in Colorado Springs, this is a tougher time. When the clash of the titans plays out on your hometown airwaves, the local car dealership or furniture store has little choice but to run for cover., In a world of darkness, one man brought illumination to the people he loved, intones a voice at the start of an advertising video. The Colorado marketing firm Vladimir Jones created this spot for an energy client. It won't run on TV anytime soon, though. Instead, it's online., Jon Bross, the media director for Vladimir Jones, says election season is always a test of his patience and his flexibility. With TV rates skyrocketing, he has to look elsewhere., Digital, cable television are excellent alternatives. Print media only sees, for example, 5 percent of the political ad dollars, so that market is a little bit more open for us, he says. You simply have to be more creative when the circus comes to town., Most of the battleground states already have seen more political ads than in all of 2008, according to an analysis from Kantar Media's CMAG. Here's a comparison of the general election cycle through Sept. 19 in each year. Note: 2012 numbers are from April 10, the day Rick Santorum dropped out of the GOP race. The 2008 general election was deemed to have begun on June 29, and 2008 ads are tracked from June 29 to Sept. 19., Source: Kantar Media's CMAG, A look at the volume of TV ads directly related to the presidential race across swing state Colorado, and in the Colorado Springs market specifically, during the same seven-day period, Sept. 13-19, in 2008 and 2012., Source: Kantar Media CMAG
A used-car lot displays a sign in support of Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney in Manchester, N.H., in January., A used-car lot displays a sign in support of Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney in Manchester, N.H., in January., Every election season, political signs sprout like dandelions from lawns across America. They also pop up at more than a few businesses. For some, expressing political preferences is a calculated move to attract customers. But it can just as easily turn clients away., Jeff Reiter, who owns the Blue Plate Lunch Counter &amp; Soda Fountain in Portland, Ore., proudly displays a 2008 Obama campaign sign inside his restaurant and says he has never tried to hide his support for the president., A few years ago, he got a nasty message from one of his customers: You have the greatest food but you support one of the worst presidents ever, it read., Instead of crumpling the note and tossing it in the trash, Reiter decided to display it in his front window next to the menu., Treading into politics might sound like a recipe for disaster, but Reiter says he doesn't think he's lost many customers over it., We encourage political discussions, he says. I think we should be talking about these things, and this is a good place to talk about them., Weighing The Risks, Businesses take a big chance by outing their politics, says Costas Panagopoulos, a political science professor at New York's Fordham University., They need to weigh the risks against the potential benefits of making such a visible expression of their preferences, he says., But the owner of one Georgia business says response to his political missives has been mostly supportive., At Premier Platforms Inc., which sells, rents and services various kinds of aerial platforms and forklifts, David Cooper uses his giant highway marquee to broadcast his politics., He's no fan of President Obama, as anyone driving along Interstate 75 near Byron, Ga., could tell: Things could be worse. Re-elect Obama he'll prove it, one recent message read, according to Macon newspaper The Telegraph. Cooper told the newspaper he could count on two hands the number of complaints he's gotten; one person threatened to picket the business, but the threat never materialized., Not all customers make their feelings known to management, however. Some, like Jeff Candiello of Somerville, Mass., just quietly take their business elsewhere., For Candiello, politics and business don't mix, and since his local barber plastered his shop with political signs, he has gone somewhere else for haircuts., In my view, it's not going to change anyone's opinion; you're just going to alienate your clientele who supports the other side, he wrote on NPR's Facebook page., An Uphill Battle For Candidates, Fordham's Panagopoulos thinks most businesses are still cautious about jumping into the political fray. As a candidate for the Massachusetts state Senate two decades ago, he got a firsthand look at how difficult it can be to enlist the open support of local businesses., At the time, he was just 19 and running as a Republican in a heavily Democratic district with an entrenched incumbent. He admits it was an uphill battle that he lost come Election Day., Even if the proprietors of some businesses wanted to support me, they acknowledged that some of their customers may not feel the same way, Panagopoulos says. They understood that they risked losing business., He remembers an incident involving an elderly couple who agreed to put up one of his signs, later to find it in their living room amid shards of broken glass from the front window., I'm sure that at some places around the country you will find examples of this type of reaction against businesses, Panagopoulos says. It's not just losing business; it's running the risk of something like this happening., 'Should I Or Shouldn't I?', Cindy Kam, a Vanderbilt University political science professor who has studied the effects of campaign signs on elections, agrees that showing support for a particular candidate can be a bad move for a business. But, she says, it can just as easily be a calculating and good one., The business owner may be thinking, If you're this kind of person, you really ought to come visit our store, because we have these kind of values, Kam says., Candiello's barber got it wrong, she says, but Premier Platforms and Blue Plate might have struck the right chord with most of their customer base., And these days, that question of Should I or shouldn't I? is somewhat easier for businesses to answer because the electorate has become more polarized, she says., Now you have Democrats who sort into going to particular places, buying particular cars, belonging to particular organizations. The same on the Republican side. There isn't as much crossover as there used to be, Kam says., For an organic coffee shop, they probably already know who their audience is, so it may not be as risky for them to put up a sign as it would be for, say, a mom-and-pop grocery store.
For more, see this story from NPR's Marilyn Geewax on how Congress might pass some stopgap measures to blunt the effect of the fiscal cliff., A bunch of federal tax increases and spending cuts are scheduled to kick in around Jan. 1, 2013. This is what people are talking about when they talk about the fiscal cliff., If recent experience is any guide, things will probably start to get crazy as the deadline approaches, and Congress will move at the last minute to block some of the tax increases and spending cuts., Before things get crazy, let's take a quick look at the numbers for fiscal year 2013., Source: The Committee For A Responsible Federal Budget, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, Here's a breakdown of the tax increases., Source: The Committee For A Responsible Federal Budget, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, The alternative minimum tax increase probably won't happen. It's this weird accounting thing that Congress needs to deal with year after year to prevent a tax increase, so they'll likely deal with it again this year., The Bush tax cuts, which were renewed by President Obama in 2010, lowered marginal tax rates across the income spectrum. Obama has argued for extending the tax cuts for household income below $250,000, and letting taxes increase for income over that level. Congressional Republicans have argued for extending all of the cuts., The payroll tax, which funds Social Security, is paid by all workers. The tax was temporarily cut by two percentage points this year in an effort to stimulate the economy. That cut expires at the end of this year. This recent Politico story suggests the cut is unlikely to be extended., New health care taxes were created by the Affordable Care Act (aka Obamacare) to pay for expanding health insurance coverage. These will mainly affect households with income over $250,000 a year., Here's a breakdown of the spending cuts., Source: The Committee For A Responsible Federal Budget, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, Lower Medicare payments to doctors probably won't happen. It's like the alternative minimum tax increase this weird accounting thing Congress needs to deal with year after year, in this case to prevent pay cuts to doctors. Congress almost always intervenes at the last minute to prevent the cuts., Unemployment benefits were expanded during the recession and extended under a temporary measure that's set to expire on Jan. 2. The program has already begun to wind down., The biggest chunk of spending cuts come from what wonks call the sequester, and what everybody else calls those random cuts that got scheduled when Congress voted at the last minute to raise the debt ceiling and set up a supercommittee to cut spending, but the supercommittee couldn't figure out how to cut spending, so now a bunch of automatic cuts are supposed to kick in. There's a good chance that Congress will intervene to block some or all of these cuts., The numbers in this post come from a recent report by the Committee For A Responsible Federal Budget. Read it here., Correction: A previous version of the graphic titled 'Sequester Breakdown' showed incorrect numbers.
How Big Companies Use Plain English to Rob You Blind, by David Cay Johnston, Hardcover, 305 pages | purchase, More on this book:, Americans are paying high prices for poor quality Internet speeds speeds that are now slower than in other countries, according to author David Cay Johnston. He says the U.S. ranks 29th in speed worldwide., We're way behind countries like Lithuania, Ukraine and Moldavia. Per bit of information moved, we pay 38 times what the Japanese pay, Johnston tells Fresh Air's Dave Davies. If you buy one of these triple-play packages that are heavily advertised where you get Internet, telephone and cable TV together typically you'll pay what I pay, about $160 a month including fees. The same service in France is $38 a month., In his new book, The Fine Print: How Big Companies Use Plain English to Rob You Blind, Johnston examines the fees that companies such as cellphone and cable have added over the years that have made bills incrementally larger., Johnston says that telephone and cable companies worked the regulatory process and the legislatures and Congress to get the rules written for their benefit., Over the last 20 years, we've paid at least $360 billion in higher rates to the traditional telephone companies, and well north of $100 billion more to the cable companies, who all testified before Congress, made filings with regulatory agencies, bought ads on TV that told us we were going to have this information superhighway and it was going to be everywhere, he says. Instead, what they built was a system in very limited locations., Johnston cites Verizon as providing fiber-optic service to 16 million Americans with no plans to build more., Investigative journalist David Cay Johnston is also the author of Free Lunch and Perfectly Legal., Investigative journalist David Cay Johnston is also the author of Free Lunch and Perfectly Legal., Whole huge parts of the country all of northwestern and central New York [and] everything away from metropolitan New York is not scheduled to get the high-speed Internet that we paid for and we were promised, he says., An investigative reporter, Johnston worked for The New York Times for 13 years and won a Pulitzer Prize in 2001 for exposing loopholes in the American tax code. He is a columnist for Reuters., On additional fees in phone bills, The phone companies, first of all, have begun adding all these additional fees. If you got a single bill and they raised the price, you'll tend to notice. But if there are lots of little fees built into the bill, and they raise this one this month, and another one two months from now, and then they raise another one two months after that you tend not to notice this., One of the items on the phone bill, one that's more than doubled in real terms in price, is often referred to as 'FCC line charge.' Now, that sounds like the Federal Communications Commission is imposing a fee on you presumably to finance the FCC. In fact, that is the charge paid to connect to the long-distance system: It goes entirely to the phone companies; it doesn't go to the government. And the FCC has something called 'a requirement for plain English language,' so people can understand their phone bills. And here is a perfect example of the misuse of language to confuse people and not have them understand what they're really paying for., On how a city built its own municipal electrical system , They created a municipal electric system. Well, they also built a municipal Internet. ... The response from AT&T;, Verizon, Cox, Time Warner and the other cable and telephone companies has been to go to legislatures and say, 'We want a law passed that either blocks or makes [it] virtually impossible to build municipal systems. That's competing with our business interests.' And that's part of the whole strategy they have: 'We want to be monopolies without competition, we want to run the system in our interests, to maximize our profits,' with no regard for the overall economy of the United States., Read an excerpt of The Fine Print
Economists hope lawmakers can avert a fiscal cliff after November's election, but what if Congress runs out of time?, Economists hope lawmakers can avert a fiscal cliff after November's election, but what if Congress runs out of time?, Members of Congress are about to flee Capitol Hill, and they'll be gone until Nov. 13, one week after Election Day., As they shift to full-time campaigning, lawmakers are leaving behind many questions about the fiscal cliff, a massive cluster of automatic spending cuts and tax-break expirations that come together around year's end., Economists backed by the White House budget office, the Congressional Budget Office and Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke warn that the country could fall into a deep recession if a fiscal cliff isn't averted., Even if Congress has left itself enough time to swerve away from a sharp-drop cliff in December, it may be pushing the country toward a fiscal ledge, which is scary too., September 17, 2012, This is probably the greatest fiscal danger facing the economy, simply because most voters and investors don't recognize its implications, J.P. Morgan Funds Global Chief Strategist David Kelly wrote in a research paper. Under a fiscal ledge scenario, even if the economy avoided outright recession, stocks would be negatively affected by a combination of very weak economic growth and higher taxes on dividends and capital gains., Here's a map to help understand this precarious place, whether a cliff or a ledge:, The term fiscal cliff has become shorthand for a group of budget (aka fiscal) policy changes that will be coming together around Jan. 1. That's when the Bush-era tax cuts expire, automatic spending cuts of $109 billion kick in, the alternative minimum tax starts hitting more middle-class families, and other measures also take effect., Congress keeps putting off the decisions that involve everything from the Pentagon budget to the expiring payroll tax holiday to cuts in Medicare payments., Economists are unanimous in saying that unless the looming changes are stopped, softened or at least phased in, the U.S. economy could plunge as if falling off an economic cliff., Conventional wisdom assumes that Congress will do something constructive in a lame-duck session the compressed legislative period that comes after an election but before a new year. Most congressional observers assume lawmakers will patch together stopgap measures, extensions and compromises taking just enough steps to avoid a cliff until the new Congress can get seated., But J.P. Morgan's Kelly fears the compromise efforts could create a sort of ledge, where investors and employers will be left dangling while weighted down by new taxes, less government spending and more policy uncertainty. Even relatively small, temporary tax hikes and spending trims could prove far too strong a dose of fiscal austerity in one year in a slow-growing economy, he wrote., In short, Congress has left itself only enough time to organize half-measures, and even those may inflict harm., But that's not the worst-case scenario. This is: Congress may not have time to do anything at all during the lame-duck session., Why? Because this election season could bring major distractions, similar to those that followed the 2000 presidential election. That year's hanging chad drama in Florida turned into a massive time suck for political leaders. Florida officials spent weeks trying to count paper ballots to determine which presidential candidate had won that state's tie-breaking electoral votes., Another tussle over ballots is possible this year, especially given the array of new state laws involving voter ID., It's also possible in this tight presidential election that neither candidate may win enough electoral votes to clinch victory. Dozens of combinations of battleground-state outcomes could leave the race undecided. If no one wins, then the House would decide the election not exactly a scenario for holding down partisanship on Capitol Hill., And it's not just the presidential race that could spur demands for recounts. All of the House seats are up for grabs, as well as 33 Senate slots. With Congress so narrowly split, each disputed seat could inflame partisan rancor and make it harder to come up with compromises by New Year's Eve., Given how many things may go wrong during November and December, a Goldman Sachs research note gives a 1 in 3 chance that Congress will fail to pass even short-term measures to avoid a cliff., Economist Mark Zandi of Moody's Analytics isn't quite so gloomy. He sees only a 15 percent chance that Congress will do nothing because members know that would be a very dark road to go down., Zandi is calling for a slightly better-than-even chance that Congress will avoid both the quick-drop cliff and a lingering ledge by actually settling issues about taxes and spending just after the new year., Laura Tyson, a Washington veteran who served as chairwoman of President Clinton's Council of Economic Advisers, says a handful of moderate senators already is laying the groundwork for that optimistic scenario. Behind the scenes, there are talks going on, she said. People are trying to put something together., That means when Congress returns on Nov. 13, the moderates could have a framework ready to quickly pass short-term compromises even if there were distractions amid election recounts. That behind-the-scenes work would also prepare the way for comprehensive solutions right after Jan. 1. That would keep the country off both the cliff and the ledge., But then again, Congress' Thanksgiving break is coming up. And college football is awfully interesting in late November. Christmas shopping must get done. And fiddling takes up a lot of time, too.
Nearly 13 million Americans have gotten, or will soon be getting, rebates from their health insurance companies. This is because of a provision in the Affordable Care Act (aka Obamacare) that's supposed to force insurance companies to run better., But while the idea of getting a check from your health insurance company may sound great, some economists worry this rule could actually make health insurance more expensive., The provision requires that health insurance companies spend at least 80 percent of premiums on health care. In other words, of the money we pay them for our health insurance, at least 80 percent has to be spent on actual health care., A lot of insurance companies run fairly high overhead rates, says Kathleen Sebelius, the secretary of Health and Human Services. And those overhead rates, which go to everything from CEO salaries, to marektiing, to agent and broker fees ... don't really add to anbody's health benefit., Under the new rule, more than 20 percent of the premiums insurance companies collect goes to overhead and profit, they have to give out refunds. The average refund people are getting is about $150. That adds up: Over $1 billion has been returned to customers, according to Sebelius., I can't tell you how many people have called or written or written or showed up and said, 'I got a check from my insurance company,' she says. They are just flabbergasted. , But as is sometimes the case, what is popular with the people is not so popular with economists. I called up six health care economists. No one thought the provision would do much good, and several thought it could be harmful., Jonathan Gruber, an economist at MIT, likes the Affordable Care Act. He actually helped craft the law. But he's wary of this particular provision., The rule has the potential to do exactly the wrong thing, he says to drive up the cost of health care., The rule says that insurance companies have to spend at least 80 percent of the premiums they collect on actual health care, and no more than 20 percent on overhead., So if you're an insurance company, you could make sure you're in compliance by reducing unnecessary overhead. That would be great for everybody., But there's another possibility. Since 80 percent of premiums have to be spent on health care, insurance companies have less incentive to keep health care costs down. They have less incentive to negotiate with hospitals that want to charge higher rates and doctors who want to order potentially unnecessary tests., I worry there that there's an incentive in that direction, Gruber says. I absolutely do.
Though fresh data from the Census Bureau show that the number of Americans living in poverty edged higher in 2011, its latest American Community Survey also signals that after a Great Recession and a painfully slow recovery the U.S. economy may finally be bottoming out., The Associated Press leads its report on the news this way:, The U.S. economy is showing signs of finally bottoming out: Americans are on the move again after record numbers had stayed put, more young adults are leaving their parents' homes to take a chance with college or the job market, once-sharp declines in births are leveling off and poverty is slowing., Reuters focuses on this news: Fewer U.S. states show income drop, Vermont's up. As it points out, Vermont's 4 percent rise in median household income last year was the first shown by a state since 2009, the Census Bureau said., Our original post Census: In 2011, Number Of Poor Americans Increased and an earlier update:, The United States Census has released its yearly American Community Survey, which uses a sample of the U.S. population to provide information on everything from disability to race and ethnicity., It's a lot of data, so analysis of will trickle in throughout the day. We'll share with you highlights on three important facets:, &mdash; The number of Americans living in poverty grew to 15.9 percent in 2011. It was 15.3 in 2010. That means that 48.5 million Americans had an income below the poverty level., The Census reports:, This was the fourth consecutive increase in the poverty rate, but the percentage point increase between 2010 and 2011 was smaller than the change between 2008 and 2009, and between 2009 and 2010., &mdash; Young Americans are one of the first to feel the effects of the Affordable Care Act, which is known colloquially as Obamacare., According to the Census, once young Americans aged 19 to 25 could be added to their parents' plans, there was a 3.5 percent increase in the number insured., The Census compared that number to to those aged 26 to 29, who saw a decline of almost 1 percent in the number of those insured during the same period., &mdash; Household incomes continue to fall., Real median household income in the United States fell between the 2010 ACS and the 2011 ACS, decreasing by 1.3 percent from $51,144 to $50,502, the Census reports., Update at 6:45 a.m. ET, Sept. 20. On Morning Edition:, William Frey, a demographer at the Brookings Institution think tank in Washington, D.C., tells NPR's Richard Gonzales that even though the poverty rate edged higher and incomes edged lower, there's at least a hint that we've hit bottom in this post-recession malaise., Frey says that because we're going down at a slower pace., Richard Gonzales on 'Morning Edition'
Texas state Rep. Wayne Christian was born two blocks from where he now lives in what is called Deep East Texas., We were not wealthy people, [we were] common laborers, but that was typical in rural East Texas at that time, he says., When he was growing up, Christian says, by first or second grade, an East Texas boy would accompany his father or grandfather on a hunting trip. But before a boy got a gun, he had to learn how to act how to address the other men respectfully, to watch how it worked., In these rituals of the woods, you saw and were seen. If you did well, someone might suggest that on the next hunt, you be awarded a rifle. And on the drive home with your dad, you'd get a loving smile and a clap on the back. Christian says words needed not be exchanged and often weren't., Rick Campbell, a Texas judge and gun owner., Rick Campbell, a Texas judge and gun owner., I remember my dad and my grandad, my dad mostly. I think it was deer hunting that we first started going to, and I'd go with them and just sit with Dad and watch what was going on, Christian says. And then when they finally put you by yourself in a stand, that was quite a time of growing up. And I was probably small enough that I was really kind of scared., The Piney Woods of East Texas is more Deep South than Wild West. But regardless of the geography, these hunting traditions, rooted in rural culture, have been passed down through many generations. And the emotional content of the associated memories is very much tied up with the guns themselves., A Changing Landscape, My grandfather, every time he got a chance to buy river bottomland, he bought river bottomland and he accumulated over 4,000 acres of land and had 14 1/2 contiguous miles of the river, says Shelby County Judge Rick Campbell, 52., East Texas has changed in Campbell's lifetime. Quite simply, what used to be vast tracks of empty land has filled up with people. The wilds where hunters once roamed now sport tract housing and double wides. It's a big reason gun ownership is declining in America down 40 percent since 1977., But here on Campbell's big farm is a little piece of what once was. And like many of his peers who came of age in the '70s and '80s, Campbell saw no reason for his daughters to be excluded from the rituals he grew up with., I guess when Brook was about 9 years old ... I had killed my first deer when I was 8, so she was sitting in my lap and a little buck walked out at about 400 yards, and she said, 'Dad, I can take him!' I said, 'Let's try to get him a little closer.' And sure enough, the buck ends up about a hundred yards out and she's sitting in my lap, Campbell says., She gets the .270 deer rifle up against her shoulder. She said, 'Dad, you want me to shoot him in the neck?' And I said, 'That's right, right in the neck.' Two seconds later, she dropped that deer, a little six-point., Standing on the very ground where the story took place, Campbell tries but cannot keep the pride from his face., I gave her that knife and I said, 'Now here's where you cut.' And I put the blood on her, and she had to take a finger and taste it and had to wear it for three days, and I cut her shirt tail the same experience I experienced with my dad that he taught me, he says., Safe, But Vigilant, Texas was once the center of the movement to safeguard gun rights. Today, nearly every fight has been won in the state, and indeed around the country., While gun owners in East Texas appreciate their rights, many remain wary., How does Judge Campbell feel about the general state of gun ownership in America and Texas?, I feel good about it. I think the Second Amendment right and the First Amendment right ... I think they're equally important, he says., Campbell's colleague Wayne Christian feels the same., Well, of course in Texas I feel very satisfied, very good. I think Texas is protected. But of course the national leadership in Washington, in the Obama administration, is a great threat, he says., For gun owners like Christian and Campbell, the election of President Obama four years ago was literally a call to arms. Gun shops across the South enjoyed a rush of customers buying weapons and ammunition of every type. Although Obama has not made gun control a campaign issue, Christian doesn't trust the administration., Because of their friendship with the United Nations, with the worldwide treaties, with weapons control and ammunition control and taxation of ammunition ... to have a president and administration that you start hearing that they're even negotiating in those types of things are great concern to those of us who believe in our freedom, Christian says., Both Christian and Campbell believe the administration is using the United Nations as a back-door channel to restrict American gun rights through proposed small arms treaties., This is all part of this attitude that Washington, our administration, is now bringing to the front. Inside the United States, we're talking, hearing taxation [is] fees and regulations that can be put on the sale of ammunition. They can't control the guns, so they're going after the bullets, Christian says., It would be difficult to overstate the level of distrust East Texas gun owners have for the Obama administration. Campbell doesn't trust the president, either, but even he is taken aback sometimes., I have friends who don't order two or three boxes of shells they order them by the thousands. And it's like, 'What are you getting ready for?' Campbell says., Although Campbell isn't preparing for a possible invasion by U.N. troops, he shares the sentiments about the president., He's done these things with the health bill. He will do these things with the U.N. treaties to take our guns away from us, Campbell says., No Compromise, At his farmhouse, Campbell goes to his gun safe., It will hold about 40 guns, and I've got about 25 in there. But I've got some really neat guns, Campbell says. I've got my grandfather's .22. I have an STW. I have an AR-15. I have a Smith &amp; Wesson .22-250., Some of the rifles are for deer. Campbell has many beautiful shotguns because he is an avid duck hunter. He uses the AR-15, which is essentially the military's M16, to hunt feral hogs. We go out back, and the judge lets fly with the semiautomatic., I've got a night vision scope on it. And the hogs only come out at 2 o'clock in the morning. There are certain spots they come out at. I drive up very quietly. I'm normally only 200 yards out, and I turn on my little trusty night vision scope and I smoke 'em. All of 'em, Campbell says. I can shoot 30 shots in eight seconds, and I've killed as many as 26 out of 30 shots at night with that gun., As for any willingness to compromise on something like limiting the size of ammunition clips, Campbell says if Democrats could be trusted not to ask for more and more, he'd consider it. But he says you can't trust Democrats in general, and you certainly can't trust Obama. And he says liberals mistake gun owners' enmity toward the president for something it's not., It's not a black thing, it's a liberal thing, Campbell says., As for the mass murders that take place in this country seemingly like clockwork, what is a ridiculous cliche to many urban Americans is bedrock truth here in East Texas: Guns don't kill people people kill people. And, the thinking goes, if there were more law-abiding Americans carrying concealed handguns, the psycho murderers could be shot before they did more damage., If you need convincing, Christian and Campbell can tell you stories until the cows come home about how the bad guys got stopped in their tracks. The NRA shares these tales of successful self-defense with their membership like sweet candy. There's no disputing its organizational success. The push for gun control in this country is deader than Campbell's hogs.
A Chick-fil-A in Fort Worth, Texas, on appreciation day last month., A Chick-fil-A in Fort Worth, Texas, on appreciation day last month., Chicago Alderman Proco Joe Moreno, who led the opposition in his city to the opening of a Chick-fil-A restaurant there because of company President Dan Cathy's outspoken stand against same-sex marriage, now says he won't stand in the fast-food chain's way., The Chicago Tribune reports that according to Moreno, the restaurant has agreed to include a statement of respect for all sexual orientations in an internal document and promised that its not-for-profit arm would not contribute money to groups that oppose gay marriage., We asked Chick-fil-A about Moreno's claim and got back this statement from spokeswoman Tracey Micit:, Chick-fil-A is a family-owned and family-led company serving the communities in which it operates. From the day Truett Cathy started the company, he began applying biblically-based principles to managing his business. For example, we believe that closing on Sundays, operating debt-free and devoting a percentage of our profits back to our communities are what make us a stronger company and Chick-fil-A family., The Chick-fil-A culture and service tradition in our restaurants is to treat every person with honor, dignity and respect regardless of their belief, race, creed, sexual orientation or gender. We will continue this tradition in the over 1,600 Restaurants run by independent Owner/Operators. Going forward, our intent is to leave the policy debate over same-sex marriage to the government and political arena., Our mission is simple: to serve great food, provide genuine hospitality and have a positive influence on all who come in contact with Chick-fil-A., Other than having reversed the order of the first two paragraphs, that's word-for-word what Chick-fil-A said on July 19, as the controversy over Cathy's comments and the support the company drew from conservatives such as Mike Huckabee began to build. The story built to a Click-fil-A appreciation day on Aug. 1 and a counter kiss in day for gay activists on Aug. 3., According to the Tribune, though, Moreno feels:, He achieved his goal of getting Chick-fil-A to 'affirm that they do not have discriminatory policies.', 'It's one thing to say that's the way you feel it's another thing to put it into a company policy and an official company statement,' Moreno said., As for the issue of donating to groups that oppose same-sex marriage, BuzzFeed Politics notes that in its statements today (to us and others) Chick-fil-A did not contest that claim. But it also did not clearly confirm it.
McDonald's plans to delay the return of the seasonal McRib sandwich in the hopes it can help boost late winter sales., McDonald's plans to delay the return of the seasonal McRib sandwich in the hopes it can help boost late winter sales., It's not quite as iconic as falling leaves, crisp air, and football, but the McDonald's McRib is usually something folks look forward to enjoying in the autumn months. Not happening this year, according to a company memo obtained by Advertising Age. Rest assured, the McRib is still coming back from its warm weather hiatus, but fans will have to wait till late December to experience that signature mix of barbeque sauce, onions, pickles and pork trimmings, scientifically squeezed into a boneless rib shape. The reason? The company wants a proven winner to help boost anticipated late quarter sales. According to the memo, the McRib was originally scheduled to show up between October 22 and November 11. But in an abrupt reversal, McDonald's pushed the McRib's annual launch all the way back to the end of the calendar year., So what's a fan to do? It feels a little displaced, said Alan Klein, creator of the McRib locator and official McRib Superfan. He's been following the McRib as it popped up around the country since 2008. In some ways it feels like such a long time to wait. But really, when it's a whole year, a couple more months, it makes it all the more worth it when you finally can have it, said Klein. But some fans are plain turned off by this apparent attempt to delay the treat so far into the winter. I feel like the McRib has jumped the shark, said Ryan Dixon. He works for a consulting firm and blogs in Burbank, Calif.. He's a long time fan of the sandwich.., McDonalds stopped selling the sandwich nationally in 1994, causing folks like Dixon to admit to All Things Considered that he once drove 10 hours to get one. It's a sort of culinary cousin of a Sasquatch, a Loch Ness monster, a chupacabra, he told host Guy Raz. You hear about a sighting, he says, but by the time you get there, the sandwich has disappeared., (The McRib went national again in 2010 for limited fall engagements nationwide, which probably ended such drives, but not the passion.), Now Dixon says the sandwich is positioned for the mainstream: Them using the McRib to boost up their sales in the end of the winter months feels like they really don't appreciate what they have. But if McDonald's worries about sales during the winter months, they're not alone. Each winter, restaurant sales drop across the country, analysts say. The colder it is, the less we go out, leaving drive-thrus empty wherever there's snow. But last year we experienced what meteorologists called a snow drought. That was music to McDonald's ears, and it allowed the company to bump sales up a huge 9.8 percent last December, according to Ad Age. This winter's going to be completely different from last winter, says Jack Boston, senior meteorologist with Accuweather. Weak El Nino weather patterns in the Pacific will likely result in much above normal snowfall amounts in the I-95 corridor where a large portion of the population of the United States lives. Bad weather is bad news for the restaurant industry. To beat or even come close to last year's sales when the weather was warm, McDonald's needs a big push and that could be the McRib, they suggest in the memo. The company did not return a call for comment.
Construction that was underway this summer in San Mateo, Calif., Construction that was underway this summer in San Mateo, Calif., In the morning's second sign of strength in the housing sector, the National Association of Realtors reports that sales of existing homes rose 7.8 percent in August from July and were 9.3 percent above the pace of August 2011., What's more, as The Associated Press reports, the adjusted annual rate of 4.82 million homes sold in August is the most since May 2012, when sales were fueled by a federal home-buying credit., And, says NAR:, The national median existing-home price for all housing types was $187,400 in August, up 9.5 percent from a year ago. The last time there were six back-to-back monthly price increases from a year earlier was from December 2005 to May 2006. The August increase was the strongest since January 2006 when the median price rose 10.2 percent from a year earlier., Our original post:, Builders started work on 2.3 percent more homes in August than in July, the Census Bureau and Department of Housing and Urban Development say., At a seasonally adjusted annual rate, work was begun on 750,000 single-family homes, apartments and condominiums, vs. 733,000 in July., Through the first eight months of 2012, starts have stayed above the 700,000-pace. In 2011, they only touched that level once in November. Prior to that, the pace hadn't hit 700,000 or above since October 2008., Of course, the pace is far below the years before the housing bubble burst in 2008. In 2004 and 2005, it was not unusual to see the rate edge above 2 million units., We'll hear more about the housing sector later this morning when the National Association of Realtors reports about sales of existing homes in August., Meanwhile, The Washington Post and The New York Times' Deal Book blog report that mortgage rates, which are already down around 3.55 percent for a 30-year loan, could be below 3 percent if banks weren't holding back., The Post writes that banks say they are keeping rates high right now because lowering them any further would overwhelm them with customers. They say that over time, as volume thins out, rates could come down to attract new borrowers. And Deal Book says the banks aren't fully passing on the low rates in the bond market to borrowers. Instead, they are taking bigger gains, and increasing the size of their cut.
Sens. Jeanne Shaheen, D-N.H., and Pat Toomey, R-Pa., talk to reporters about the farm bill at the U.S. Capitol in June., Sens. Jeanne Shaheen, D-N.H., and Pat Toomey, R-Pa., talk to reporters about the farm bill at the U.S. Capitol in June., Congress is set to make a brief appearance in Washington this week, then recess until after Election Day. That means a farm bill is likely to be left undone, just one of the many items on lawmakers' to-do lists that won't happen anytime soon., The 2008 farm bill, which provides funding for a variety of nutrition programs, including the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (formerly food stamps), as well as payments to farmers and agricultural programs, will technically expire Sept. 30., So what does it mean if Congress just leaves it on the table? In theory, some fairly scary things. For example, in the absence of either a new bill or an extension of the 2008 law, federal price supports revert to their 1949 levels., Some farmers would be big winners the government would pay huge bonuses for wheat, for example while some farmers would get nothing at all. That's because some commodities, including soybeans, were added to the list of those supported by government after 1949., At that point, we'll have $38 milk, Rep. Collin Peterson, D-Minn., told a rally at the Capitol last week. So what do you dairy farmers think about that? (That $38 refers to the price per 100 pound weight the wholesale pricing unit. Basically, it works out to nearly four times what dairy farmers are guaranteed now.), But the reality is, almost none of the changes would happen right after Sept. 30., We actually have until about Jan. 1 before we run into a lot of administrative problems with this bill reverting to some very high prices, says Mary Kay Thatcher, director of congressional affairs for the American Farm Bureau Federation., That's because while the date on the law matches the federal fiscal year, the 2008 measure covers all of 2012's crops. So even if they haven't been harvested yet, things growing now are covered by the 2008 legislation. The first crop that would be affected by the new price supports would be next spring when we harvest winter wheat, Thatcher says., Vincent Smith, a professor of economics at Montana State University and a visiting scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, says the real reason supporters of the farm bill are in such a rush to get their bill done has more to do with budget politics than with the actual mechanics of the programs., They want to have a farm bill now that locks Congress and the taxpayer into obligations based on either the Senate or the House bill, he tells NPR. What they're concerned about is that, if serious deficit-reduction talks take place, then a lot more money than was initially identified to come out of the farm bill by the supercommittee a year and a bit ago will have to come out of the farm bill., A version of the farm bill was approved by the Senate earlier this year; a House committee approved a different version, including deeper cuts to food stamps., When was the last time Congress let the farm bill lapse? The last time it was up for renewal: 2007. The bill expired on Sept. 30, and we didn't pass the first extension until the 26th of December, says Thatcher. And then I think it was extended another four or five times after that before we finally got the actual bill done., So both Thatcher and Smith say to look for Congress to do some kind of extension of farm programs during its postelection lame duck session. But also, don't panic in the meantime.
An incentive system that gave bonuses to teachers upfront, with the threat of having to give the money back if student performance didn't improve, proved effective in one study., In Chicago, parents were fuming over a weeklong strike by teachers. Around the rest of the country, in the face of growing evidence that many U.S. students are falling behind, administrators have tried to devise different ways to motivate teachers., Among the contentious issues is whether teachers should be held accountable for their students' performance on standardized tests. Such efforts have produced enormous conflicts between school districts and teachers. In many parts of the country, administrators and teachers have fought one another to a standstill., That's where a novel social science study may have the potential to shift the conversation., Economist John List at the University of Chicago recently conducted an unusual field experiment in Chicago Heights, a school district near Chicago. List and his colleagues found a struggling school district: Only 64 percent of students met minimum state requirements on achievement tests. Nearly all the kids qualified for free or reduced-price school lunches, a measure of straitened socio-economic conditions., List and his colleagues, Roland G. Fryer, Steven Levitt and Sally Sadoff, divided 150 teachers into three groups. One group got no incentive; they just went about their school year as usual. A second group was promised a bonus if their students did well at math., The third group is where the psychology came in: The teachers were given a bonus of $4,000 upfront but it had a catch. If student math performance didn't improve, teachers had to sign a contract promising to return some or all of the money., Other U.S. studies have found limited evidence that traditional bonuses do much to shift student scores., List said the idea of giving some teachers money upfront with the threat of taking it away later builds on a well-known psychological principle: What we tried to capitalize on in this particular study was a concept called loss aversion, he said. Once we have something in our possession, we feel it would be really, really painful to have to give it up., Loss aversion has been shown to be a powerful motivator in many business settings, but List said this was the first rigorous test of the principle in an educational setting. The idea, he said, was that by giving teachers the money upfront, they might work harder to keep the money at the end of the year than they would if the money had been promised as a traditional bonus., In line with earlier work, List and his colleagues found that students of teachers who received the traditional bonus performed no better than students of teachers who received no incentive at all. But List found that students of teachers who were given the bonus upfront showed significant improvement in math test scores., What we found is strong evidence in favor of loss aversion, he said. Teachers who were paid in advance and [were] asked to give the money back if their students did not perform their [students'] test scores were actually out of the roof: two to three times higher than the gains of the teachers in the traditional bonus group., The difference in test scores produced by the incentive system was about the same as that detected in earlier studies that measured differences in student performance when kids were taught by great teachers rather than average teachers. Effectively, List said, the way the incentive was constructed turned average teachers into great teachers., List said he thinks that the incentive system motivated teachers to be extra vigilant with underperforming students. If Johnny didn't get a concept, a teacher stuck with Johnny and the concept until the kid got it., There are several caveats to keep in mind before anyone can talk about implementing the bonus structure widely, List said. Among them: The study needs replication. It remains to be seen whether the gains in student performance are long-lasting, and whether the same increases in student performance can be found in subjects other than math., List said future studies might also tweak the incentive system: Teachers may be asked to return the money for underperformance periodically, rather than all at once at the end of the year. Prior studies involving loss aversion have found that the technique is more effective when people feel the threat of periodic and regular losses., But there's another catch: List warned that the bonus system needed buy-in from teachers. Teaching isn't like making widgets; it requires motivation and passion. If teachers feel they are being manipulated rather than encouraged to improve their performance, they could end up looking for other lines of work.
Dr Pepper's Facebook ad is the latest riff on a 1965 evolutionary graphic, which apparently still has the power to provoke., I'm a Pepper, You're a Pepper, but clearly, some people are not Peppers., Dr Pepper's new Facebook ad campaign featuring an ape moving from all-fours, to seeing a soda on a rock, to an upright man, enjoying a Pepper, is apparently red meat to some creationists who are loudly expressing outrage at the idea that humans evolved from soda-discovering apes., I ain't no freaking chimp. No more Dr Pepper for my household, reads a typical comment from an offended reader. But other readers responded, defending the ad as funny and not an endorsement of evolution just an ad. But in the end, does it work as a marketing tool?, Aren't advertisers always straddling the line between provocative and offensive, in order to stand out?, The reality is, the Dr Pepper ad is the latest in a long line of food ads that offend various groups of religious people. Burger King offended Hindus by seating a goddess atop a hamburger. McDonald's took a hit from Muslims when it released a Power Ranger with squiggly designs on the base that look like the Arabic word for Muhammad to some people. These and nine more are helpfully listed on a blog called 11 Points Because Top 10 Lists Are for Cowards., But the Pepper ad is also not new. It's one of thousands of parodies of the now infamous scientific illustration of evolution from 1965 called March of Progress. And it's amazing that these ads still have the power to offend, says AdWeek's blog, AdFreak. Once again, though, it goes to show how protests can spread like wildfire in social media, where outrage and counteroutrage are just a click away., Note that these food-related outrages have registered nowhere near the social media mania generated by Newsweek's cover story on MUSLIM RAGE this week yet.
Senegalese vendor Cheikh Fall prepares his stall in front of Brooks Brothers on 51st Street, just off the Avenue of the Americas in New York City. Fall runs an association of Senegalese vendors that deals with the city over licensing and regulations., Senegalese vendor Cheikh Fall prepares his stall in front of Brooks Brothers on 51st Street, just off the Avenue of the Americas in New York City. Fall runs an association of Senegalese vendors that deals with the city over licensing and regulations., Careful planning can transform the shape and life of a city. But sometimes, a city's features develop spontaneously like the immigrant enclaves that grow around certain jobs and trades in urban centers like New York., Occupational cliches have been a fact of life in the Big Apple for generations. Historically, New Yorkers thought of Jewish tailors, Italian greengrocers or Irish policemen, says Philip Kasinitz, a sociologist with the City University of New York., In more recent times, Kasinitz tells NPR's Robert Siegel, a New Yorker might point to Korean vegetable stand owners, Pakistani cab drivers before that, it was Russian cab drivers West Indian nurses and West Indian child care workers., Kasinitz says social capital family connections and contacts created those occupational associations, and still does, even as the immigrant groups change., In today's New York, one particular group the Senegalese occupy a very visible commercial niche, selling umbrellas, handbags, hats and scarves from tables or carts on sidewalks all across the city., Cheikh Fall sets up his stall. He lives by the motto, Work like you're never gonna die, and worship like you will die tomorrow., Cheikh Fall sets up his stall. He lives by the motto, Work like you're never gonna die, and worship like you will die tomorrow., Making A Living On The Weather, Senegalese vendors have become so visible in the past two decades that the group has achieved cliche status among New Yorkers especially when it rains., The joke used to be that you got very depressed when you saw the Senegalese umbrella vendors setting up, Kasinitz says. Because no matter how nice a day it was, that meant rain was coming soon. They knew., We know ahead at least five days, says Cheikh Fall, who set up his table near Radio City Music Hall on a recent afternoon., Since the sidewalk vendors depend on the elements, he says, they follow the weather forecasts religiously. We start following the rain from Florida to here, from Chicago to here., Fall says the vendors know which forecasters to believe and which to discount. And, he says, if you could bet against the weather forecasts, the Senegalese community would be full of rich people., Fall, 45, is a father of four with a thin mustache and a clean-shaven head. He runs an association of Senegalese vendors that deals with the city over licensing and regulations. His table boasts fedoras, ladies' hats, scarves and sunglasses, but all those items take second place to umbrellas on a rainy day., Fall says he's the son of an airline executive, but most of his fellow vendors grew up less well-off. When they reached the United States, he says, they gravitated toward a business that feels somewhat familiar., Most of them was traders or farmers [back in Senegal], Fall says. And if you're a farmer, you have to trade your crops. So coming to a city like New York, where there's no factories, there's no farming ... trading was the only thing that was available and that they can relate to, because they was doing it also back home., Location, Location, Location, Many Senegalese immigrants also came to New York without papers and were ineligible to work in other jobs., In Fall's case, he came to attend college 20 years ago. He dropped out, worked as a court interpreter, became a citizen and then enlisted in the Navy., With $450 and a tip from another vendor about how to connect with wholesalers (go to trade shows, he said), Fall went into business in 2003., Making a living this way relies on many things, but one is the old adage: location, location, location. When it's raining, Fall says he usually sets up near hotels on 5th Avenue or on Broadway., And when Apple unveiled its new iPhone, Fall selected Radio City Music Hall, rather than the Broadway Apple Store, based strictly on personal experience., People are not focusing on what's next to the Apple Store; they're only focusing on the new product they're going to get, Fall says. They don't care about the hat, they don't care about sunglasses ... After you go to Apple store, and you bought something you like, or something that's expensive, then [you think], OK, I spent enough money today, I'm not going to buy me a hat., Fall says Senegalese immigrants bring a strong work ethic that accounts for their success as sidewalk vendors in cities all around the world., Nearly all of the Senegalese vendors in New York are adherents of a Senegalese branch of Sufi Islam, a very spiritual form of the faith. Fall points to the teaching of a Senegalese sage that guides him and many of his countrymen: Work like you never gonna die, and worship like you will die tomorrow., And the work is hard. It takes Fall about 40 minutes to unpack his van and get set up early enough to catch New Yorkers on their lunch break. It takes just as long, he says, to tear down and pack up after the evening rush hour. A bathroom break requires another vendor to watch the table, and friends in nearby restaurants or hotels who will let him use their restroom., A Constantly Shifting City Tapestry, Fall says he can support his family doing this, but there's no money for extras. So he's trying to move up. Like so many of the city's pushcart peddlers before him, he's taking his business indoors; he and his wife have opened a shop in their Harlem neighborhood., Perhaps in a generation, vendors like Fall will all be shop owners, making the Senegalese sidewalk vendor as archaic a cliche as the Jewish tailor and the Italian greengrocer., When asked to speculate about what newer immigrant group may soon fill a new commercial niche in New York's vibrant melting pot, sociologist Philip Kasinitz says Tibetan women are quickly moving into the child care business., There aren't too many Tibetans in New York, Kasinitz says, but they do seem to be quite concentrated in child care work ... [On] the question of the preferred child care worker, people from that part of Asia are now beginning to have that image.
Cowboys get the cows lined up in a chute to administer shots to prepare them for artificial insemination., Cowboys get the cows lined up in a chute to administer shots to prepare them for artificial insemination., Jeanne Marie Laskas first came across hidden America 500 feet underground, traveling with miners through a narrow, dark coal mine in Ohio. There, she realized how dependent Americans are on the work of miners, yet most people know very little about their world or their work., In a new book, Laskas chronicles her weeks spent following the lives of those whose jobs are nearly invisible to most of us, from air traffic controllers and truck drivers, to migrant workers and professional football cheerleaders., NPR's Neal Conan talks with Laskas about the people she met while researching her book, Hidden America: From Coal Miners to Cowboys, An Extraordinary Exploration of the Unseen People Who Make This Country Work., On air traffic controllers at LaGuardia Airport, The working conditions were not so easy. It was quite dilapidated. But those workers, in particular, regarded themselves really as public servants. They guide our airplanes, make sure they get up in the air at the right time and land without bashing into each other. And they found it to be work that mattered, and that mattered to them. ..., From Coal Miners to Cowboys, an Extraordinary Exploration of the Unseen People Who Make This Country Work, by Jeanne Marie Laskas, Hardcover, 318 pages | purchase, More on this book:, We have to be really thankful that there are people like Brian and Lars and some of the other characters I introduce in that book who are in those towers. The problem is that they're overworked, and there aren't enough of them, and there are not enough of them in the pipeline coming up to be trained. And this is a bit of a crisis., In fact, it's been recognized for several years. Now, we need to talk to the FAA about that, not our controllers who are, you know, they're doing it. They're doing the job and doing it, you know, heroically., On cowboys at R.A. Brown Ranch in Throckmorton, Texas, [The cowboys' work is] extremely high-tech ... I mean, literally down to the marbling, looking at ultrasound of living cows to calibrate the amount of back fat for the precise level of marbling, that they have worked with the genes of the cows to create that. I mean, it is unbelievable. And they are these guys in ... you know, cowboy hats., On migrant workers picking blueberries in Maine, The beautiful blueberry festival in Machias, Maine ... happens every summer. You know, it's happened for generations, and it still goes on today. And they have a tour. You can get on a bus and take a tour to the actual blueberry barrens. You get on that bus, you go out, who are you seeing? You're seeing these migrant workers who don't go to the festival, who don't have time to go to the festival., They're the ones who are laboring right there under the noses of, you know, everyone the consumer. We don't think about that. ... It's really easy to sort of get romantic about this or to romanticize this situation and think, 'Yeah, community, what's the matter? How come you don't come out to those fields anymore?' You know, it's sort of like a dying culture, and isn't that sad?, But then you go, 'OK, well, wait a minute? How much are these people getting paid to pick these blueberries? And who has time? And what's the matter with that farmer who's not paying enough money to pick the blueberries?' Well, take it the next step: Where does that cost translate? That translates to us, the consumer. Are we really willing to pay $30 a pound for blueberries? No, we want them affordable. So that's who's eating the cost the worker., Read an excerpt of Hidden America
A worker inspects auto parts at a factory in Chengdu, China. (2005 file photo.), A worker inspects auto parts at a factory in Chengdu, China. (2005 file photo.), The White House Monday will demand through a world trade panel that China stop subsidizing auto parts made for export, reports Cleveland's Plain Dealer., The Associated Press, which has followed the Plain Dealer's scoop with reporting of its own, says that Obama will use the power of incumbency to counter Republican Mitt Romney's criticism that he is ceding American jobs to the Asian power., According to the wire service:, Senior administration officials said the president will announce the new case, targeting Chinese subsidies for exports of automobiles and automobile parts, Monday during a campaign trip to Ohio. The swing state has a large manufacturing base where many blame China for depressing its industry., Also citing senior administration officials, the Plain Dealer says that the administration will make the case to the World Trade Organization that China undercuts manufacturers in Ohio and elsewhere by reducing the cost of Chinese auto parts and that the practice also encourages U.S. companies to outsource jobs., The Plain Dealer also writes that in a separate action, the administration will ask the WTO to step up a review of what the White House says are unfair duties that China levies on American-made cars., Update at 1:05 p.m. ET. China Files Its Own Complaint, Obama And Romney Trade Charges:, Beijing fired back with a complaint against U.S. duties on many Chinese exports, in the latest sign of trade tension between the world's two largest economies, the AP reports. China's countercomplaint filed on Monday potentially affects close to 30 products that have previously been targeted by U.S. duties, a trade official familiar with the case said. In a brief statement, the WTO said the products included steel, tires, magnets, chemicals, kitchen appliances, wood flooring and wind towers., Meanwhile, the wire service writes:, Obama told thousands gathered at a pavilion in Cincinnati's leafy Eden Park that Romney made money from companies that outsourced jobs to China while running the private equity firm Bain Capital. The crowd jeered. Obama responded, 'Don't boo. Vote!', 'You can't stand up to China when all you've done is send them our jobs,' Obama said. 'You can talk a good game. But I like to walk the walk, not just talk the talk. And my experience has been waking up every single day doing everything I can to make sure that American workers get a fair shot in the global economy.', Romney responded in a statement accusing Obama of ignoring China for too long. The Republican promised to act from his first day in office to help U.S. businesses compete., 'Campaign-season trade cases may sound good on the stump, but it is too little, too late for American businesses and middle class families,' Romney said. 'President Obama's credibility on this issue has long since vanished.' , Update at 10:05 a.m. ET. China Must Live Up To Its International Obligations., In a statement sent to reporters a short time ago, U.S. Trade Representative Ron Kirk confirms the U.S. is seeking dispute settlement consultations with the Government of China at the World Trade Organization and says that:, China expressly agreed to eliminate all export subsidies when it joined the WTO in 2001. China benefits from international trade rules and must in turn live up to its international obligations.
Joe Hoagland, left, pushes a canoe through a wild rice bed as 14-year-old Chris Salazar learns how to harvest the rice., Joe Hoagland, left, pushes a canoe through a wild rice bed as 14-year-old Chris Salazar learns how to harvest the rice., Harvest season is upon us, but in the U.S.'s northern lakes, it's not just the last tomatoes and first pumpkins. Through the end of this month, canoes will glide into lakes and rivers for the annual gathering of wild rice, kick started with the popular Wild Rice Festival in Roseville, Minn., on Saturday., Wild rice - an aquatic grass that bears a resemblance to the edible grain - has been the center of the Ojibway Indian diet and culture for centuries. It's considered a gift from the Creator, according to Thomas Vennum, who wrote the book on it. According to legend, the Ojibway followed a prophecy to find the place where the food grows on the water, which was around Lake Superior, particularly in Minnesota., The Ojibway gather wild rice by hand. Ricers went out two to a canoe, one with a forked push pole, and the other with a pair of wooden flails used to knock the rice into the boat. To protect the fields, Minnesota restricts the harvesting season and regulates boats and tools. Tribal harvesters manage themselves, and reservation waters are off limits to other ricers., I grew up in 1950s Minnesota eating this nutty, earthy grain, and I didn't realize that in other places, it was a rare treat. But in the 1960s, scientists and businessmen tamed the wild rice, grew it in paddies and harvested by machine. Thirty years later, less than 10 percent of the world's wild rice was gathered by hand. Unlike the irregular, light brown lake rice, cultivated rice is almost black and uniform in size and shape., But cultivated is a swear word on the reservation. Wild rice is a source of income for the Ojibway, and the cheaper paddy rice dropped the price. There are also other concerns like mining, dams, and inclement weather. This year, severe flooding drowned much of the crop., Processing or finishing lake rice is hugely labor intensive. First, it's parched, or roasted, over a fire. Then it's hulled and winnowed. This can involve dancing the rice in a pit. But there have been a few mechanical advancements. , Bruce Savage has been finishing rice since he was 16. He's now 50 and is called the young guy because rice finishing is a dying art. He finished 15,000 pounds last year at his home on the edge of the reservation. Rule of thumb? 100 pounds per person., His friend Rick Smith, who works with American Indian youth at the University of Minnesota, explains, Rice is very spiritual for us. That's why we came here., Bonny Wolf is the contributing editor of NPR's Kitchen Window. You can follow her on Twitter at @bonnywolf. , , Recipe: Wild Rice Krispy Bars, This recipe is from Rick Smith, director of the American Indian Learning Resource Center at the University of Minnesota's Duluth campus. He says only hand-parched wild lake rice works. Cultivated wild rice doesn't pop. Don't expect fluffy kernels like popcorn. Wild lake rice pops into tiny, squiggly forms. It has a rich, nutty taste and wonderful crunch. The cooking medium is vegetable oil or, if you're really feeling decadent, lard. Wild rice pops very quickly in under 5 seconds so be careful. Serve it plain with salt as an hors d'ouevres, sprinkle in salads or make into, yes, wild rice krispy treats., xbc pound (1 stick) butter, 10 ounces marshmallows, 8-10 cups popped wild rice, Vegetable oil, To pop the rice, fill an 8-inch skillet 2/3 full with shortening. Heat until almost boiling, but not smoking. It's ready when you drop a kernel of rice into the hot oil and it pops., Put xbc cup or less wild rice into the bottom of a 6-inch wire mesh strainer and immerse into hot oil for 2 to 5 seconds, or until all rice is popped. (There is also an instructional rice-popping YouTube video.) Drain in paper towel-lined container. Continue until you have desired amount of rice., Melt butter in a 10-inch cooking pot over low heat. Add marshmallows and stir until completely melted. Add popped wild rice and stir into marshmallow mix until well coated., Butter a 12-by-16-by-1-inch pan. Using a buttered spatula or waxed paper, press mixture evenly into the pan. Cut into squares when cool.,
An ice cream recall is the latest in a line of Penn State's woes., An ice cream recall is the latest in a line of Penn State's woes., As if Penn State didn't have enough problems these days, it looks like someone may be spiking its famous ice cream., The historic Berkey Creamery is recalling all ice cream and frozen yogurt made between May 16 and Aug. 11 after three people reported finding small plastic foreign objects in their favorite half-gallons. One person even reported finding a penny, according to the Centre Daily Times., The creamery is erring on the side of caution, it says, by conducting a broad recall that stretches from the State College campus to Internet sales. Although by all accounts these appear to be isolated incidents, they are troubling to say the least, says Tom Palchak, creamery manager, in a press release distributed by the Food and Drug Administration., No injuries or illnesses have been reported., The incident came to light after campus police began a criminal investigation when plastic bits less than one-inch long began appearing in some customers' ice cream last month., The creamery doesn't think the foreign objects got there while the ice cream was made. An independent investigation of the reports of foreign objects conducted for the Creamery, while not conclusive, suggests that the objects did not enter the ice cream during the manufacturing process, the press release says., Still, it's stepping up surveillance, alerting suppliers, and using an X-ray device and metal detectors just like lots of other manufacturers in the hopes of keeping the ice cream adulterers from sabotaging more sundaes.
This guy lives in a computer. Can you get him a job?, The world inside Mark Zandi's computer model feels pretty familiar. It's full of people who are worried about the economy. Their homes are being foreclosed on. They're paying more for gas. Something like 13 million of them can't find jobs., Zandi is the chief economist at Moody's Analytics, and he built his model to predict what's going to happen in the real world. When he plugs what he thinks is going to happen in the real world, his model spits out a pretty grim result: Four years from now, the unemployment rate will be 6.6 percent. That's lower than today, but still much higher than the 5 percent rate that was typical before the recession., I recently sat down with Zandi, and gave him a challenge: Fix the economy in the world inside your computer. Try to ensure that, four years from now, the unemployment rate inside the computer will get back down to 5 percent., Zandi starts big: He fixes the U.S. government. Republicans and Democrats work together to agree on a long term plan to deal with the country's debt through a mix of tax increases and spending cuts., The computer chews on this unlikely event for a few seconds, solving equations, calculating some 1700 variables. It tells us that, four years from now, the unemployment rate will be 6.1 percent., Still uncomfortably high, Zandi says., Next up: Gas prices. Zandi brings down the price of a barrel of oil by about $20. The price of gas in the U.S. falls to $3 a gallon., This, sadly, only reduces unemployment by a tenth of one percent. Zandi's not surprised., Gasoline prices are outsized in our thinking, he says. But when it comes down to brass tacks. still a small proportion., On to Europe., Let's make sure the euro survives. Inside Zandi's computer, the European economy is going to grow. Not grow like crazy, but grow more than it's growing now. That means more U.S. exports to Europe. And it means that U.S. unemployment four years from now will be 5.9 percent., Still too high. In fact, It is surprisingly hard to get back to a 5 percent unemployment rate in the world inside Zandi's computer., But we keep trying. We boost home prices by 10 percent. We make banks lend out more money. We raise consumer confidence. We still can't get to 5 percent unemployment. It's time to get crazy., We make people not just confident, but super confident. We cut the price of a barrel of oil in half. We give Europe a spectacular recovery. China keeps growing. Africa takes off., We let the computer rip. In 2016, it tells us, the unemployment rate will be 5.2 percent. No matter what we do, we can't seem to get the unemployment rate down to 5 percent., What's happening is the economy is reaching its new limits, Zandi says., This is something I hadn't really appreciated before. When you go through a really big, catastrophic recession, it's not always possible to fix things., Millions of people lost their jobs in the recession. At the same time new high school and college grads started looking for jobs., The economy just can't grow fast enough to absorb the backlog. Zandi says we'll have an extra million people looking for jobs, and unable to find them., We dug ourselves a huge hole, Zandi says, Its gonna take a generation to get completely out of it.
A job fair was held at the The Walter E. Washington Convention Center in Washington, D.C., last month. The U.S. unemployment rate declined in August in part because the number of discouraged workers climbed., A job fair was held at the The Walter E. Washington Convention Center in Washington, D.C., last month. The U.S. unemployment rate declined in August in part because the number of discouraged workers climbed., The U.S. population is growing. In normal times, the labor force working or not would be growing too. But these are not normal times, and the labor force is actually smaller than it was four years ago, meaning millions of people who should be there aren't., The labor market is shrinking as discouraged workers give up on their job searches. The Bureau of Labor Statistics describes discouraged workers as persons not currently looking for work because they believe no jobs are available for them. The ranks of discouraged workers, by total numbers, have gone up in every age group over the past five years., Source: Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, The reasons people drop out of the workforce are myriad. People go back to school. Others have health issues or family priorities that keep them from looking for work. But some stop looking because they are discouraged., 'Discouraged' is not just a state of mind. It's an official term the Labor Department uses to describe the 844,000 people who last month had given up on trying to find a job because they didn't think there was anything out there for them. So while the unemployment rate edged down this month, there are also more people who have quit sending out resumes, put their best suits back in the closet and stopped looking for work altogether., Retirement And Its Malcontents, Both Geoff Dutton and his wife, a neuroscientist, have Ph.D.'s. But for years now, neither has found work. Dutton spent years writing software manuals. At 68, he says he can't afford to retire, yet finding a job also feels out of reach., My skills were beginning to slip away, Dutton says. I wasn't up on the new version of everything anymore. Software was turning to the cloud and the Web. The companies that were in that area kept looking for people who had been in that area, and that wasn't me., Discouraged workers like Dutton aren't the only ones not in the job market anymore, but there's little conclusive information about who these people are, or what they're doing instead., It really looks like people are limping across the finish line to retirement, says Courtney Coile, an economist at Wellesley College who studies older workers., Geoff Dutton, an unemployed software developer, has given up on finding a job. He says the market has shifted, and he could not keep up. I wasn't up on the new version of everything anymore, he says., For some, dropping out of the labor force is a good sign: Their stock portfolios have recovered, and they can now retire comfortably., But Coile says a very small percentage of labor force dropouts can claim to be so lucky. The numbers suggest less educated, long-term-unemployed people are turning elsewhere. The number of people on disability insurance has increased more than 20 percent in the past four years., It looks like, for some people, the disability insurance programs function as an unemployment insurance of last resort, Coile says., School: Not Always The Best Years Of Your Life, School is another force pulling workers away from their job searching, but going back to school isn't exactly an attractive option for workers in their 50s. Nonetheless, school enrollment is increasing because of people like Lara Jones, who opted to retrain after losing her job as a contractor for Microsoft. For two years, employers told her she was underqualified for programming jobs but overqualified for supermarket work., I was doing all the things that they said you're supposed to do, customizing my resume to job postings, Jones says. I was getting good feedback on my interview skills. I was doing all the things you're supposed to do, but it wasn't working., At 44 years of age, Jones secured financial aid and enrolled in community college. Next year, she hopes to transfer to the University of Washington and become a software engineer, a skill she knows is in demand. But, she admits, it is odd being old enough to be your classmate's mother., I did an internship over the summer, and it's just really weird to be 44 and be an intern, Jones says. It's just sort of uncomfortable. It's really weird when your teachers are roughly the same age that you are., For Carol Bellows, the trade-off of going back to school in her 40s did not pay off., I regret going to school. I regret being in that debt. I made more money as a ballet dancer than as a landscape architect, Bellows says., 'It Feels Like You Can't Participate In Society', Now 57, Bellows lives in Tigart, Ore. Her degree did get her a good job, but it lasted only a year., I got a bonus check, at Christmas, Bellows says, laughing. All those things that I'd been hearing about for years with real jobs. And I had health insurance, and it was just truly amazing., Since 2008, her only job has been a temporary gig with the census. Recently, she gave up looking. She says it simply made sense. Her job search took a lot of time, which meant household chores fell to her husband., He's actually asked me to drop the job search, and take care of things, so the rest of our life doesn't fall apart, Bellows says., Now, Bellows says making money is not the only thing she misses., You can't participate in society, she says, voice full of emotion. You can't go to the store and buy something because you can't afford to. You can't go to a firm and have a Christmas party., Bellows says she still hopes to work again someday, but that sometimes it feels like it would be easier to win the lottery.
An Amazon worker sorts packages at a fulfillment center in Goodyear, Ariz., It's not hard to find online shoppers these days. Take the hipster cafe in San Francisco's Mission District where Shirin Oskooi opens her laptop and ticks off her latest Amazon purchases., Next to her is Craig Sumner. He opens an Amazon invoice to see how much sales tax he was charged on his latest pair of Levis: none., States currently subject to online tax: , Kansas , Kentucky , New York , North Dakota , Pennsylvania , Texas , Washington , States expected to collect online sales taxes: , New Jersey July 2013 , Virginia September 2013 , Indiana January 2014 , Nevada January 2014 , South Carolina January 2016 , Sources: Amazon/CNN , That changes Saturday, when a new law passed by the cash-strapped state goes into effect. Every out-of-state business that sells more than $1 million in merchandise to California customers will be required to collect sales tax and ship it back to state coffers. Before, that was only true of companies with a store in the state, like Target or Wal-Mart., The Web shopping behemoth Amazon lobbied hard against collecting tax, arguing it wasn't its responsibility because it didn't have a store in California. Local mom-and-pop businesses countered that by not charging the tax, the corporate giant had an unfair advantage., I think it's capitalism at its best. I think it's the market just shifting, says Jerome Horton, who chairs the state tax agency., Horton estimates that California is losing $1.2 billion a year in unreported sales tax. He expects the new collection effort will recoup about a quarter of that., Amazon Agrees To Collect State Tax In California, For New Jersey Shoppers, No More Sales Tax Holiday On Amazon, He's hiring a small army of new collectors and auditors to target companies that don't comply., They're going to test our will to enforce the law, Horton says. We're not talking about folks who make mistakes. We're talking about people who intentionally don't pay their fair share. Not a penny. Zero. Nothing!, Under the new law, it doesn't matter if an out-of-state retailer has a brick-and-mortar store in California. But and here's the important caveat Horton says they must have local contractors who bring in at least $10,000 in sales., And so what many of the companies have done is that they chose to shut down their affiliates here in California, he says., That's exactly what another mega e-tailer, Overstock.com, is doing. President Jonathan Johnson says he's terminating contracts with hundreds of California affiliates to comply with the law., Overstock.com will always be a good corporate citizen, and we will collect tax any place where we have a physical presence as long as that's the law of the land. California's attempts to expand that law aren't constitutional, Johnson says., The main winners, at least for the moment, may be small online retailers who don't sell enough in California to collect the tax, like Silver Gallery in Waynesboro, Va. Last year it sold about $300,000 in silver frames, and flutes and trinkets to California., Still, owner Stacey Strawn fears it's just a matter of time before she'll have to collect, given that Amazon caved and that similar proposals are popping up in other states, and even in Congress., As bills like this begin to pass and I hope they don't businesses my size are probably going to give up, and you're going to have a lot less choice for your Internet shopping, says Strawn., Back at the cafe in San Francisco, another frequent Amazon shopper, Susan Landau, says it's not just about price. She plans to keep shopping online., It's still more convenient to shop online than to go to the store, so sales tax isn't something that I worry about all that much, Landau says. I think it's fine.
Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke speaks during a news conference in Washington., Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke speaks during a news conference in Washington., Federal Reserve Chief Ben Bernanke said the new monetary policy announced today is aimed at getting the U.S. economy moving for good., After a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, the Fed announced that it would spend $40 billion a month on mortgage-backed securities in an effort to stimulate the economy and drive the the unemployment rate down., It's a policy commonly referred to as quantitative easing and this is the third round of the policy the Fed has taken on. There was a twist, this time however, because the Fed made an open-ended commitment. Bernanke was asked several times what measures the Fed would use to decide how long to continue with the securities purchases., We want improvement to be sustained improvement, Bernanke said. We're not looking for wiggles in the data., Bernanke was also pressed about the kind of effect this policy would have on Main Street. Essentially, one reporter said, this policy translates to trickle down economics. The banks are given more money and the Fed hopes that loans will trickle down to the rest of America., This is a Main Street policy because we're trying to create employment, he said, explaining the tools available to the Federal Reserve are tied to monetary policy, so they can't, for example, create a program that lends directly to consumers., But he said, this policy will hopefully nudge home prices up, bring interest rates down and edge stock investments up., Demand, he said, is a problem and if people feel better ... they may spend more., Ultimately, though, Bernanke admitted that Fed policy can only do so much., This is not a panacea, he said. In fact, he said, the tools at the hands of Fed may not be strong enough to contain the kind of economic shock that the Congressional Budget Office projects will happen if Congress doesn't act this year and allows the expiration of the Bush-era tax cuts and across-the-board cuts to take place Jan. 1., Bernanke also fielded a question about making this kind of policy change during an election year., We have tried very, very hard to be non-partisan and apolitical, Bernanke said, adding that the Fed's decisions are made solely on the basis of economic data not politics.
Any questions?, What people think is going to happen to the economy has a huge influence over what actually happens. If you can change peoples' expectations, you can change the world., The Federal Reserve knows this. And, as Robert Smith pointed out this morning, Ben Bernanke and the Fed have been using the power of expectations more and more in recent years., This afternoon, the Fed took another huge step in this direction., The Fed just released a policy statement that is a very big deal not so much because of the specific actions the Fed announced, but because of the language the Fed used, and the expectations that language will create., The Fed announced a new plan to buy $40 billion of mortgage bonds every month. It's the third round of quantitative easing buying long-term bonds to drive down interest rates, which is supposed to encourage people to spend money and get businesses to invest and hire workers. (Here's more on quantitative easing.), But the purchases themselves aren't what makes today's announcement so important. In fact, $40 billion a month is smaller than previous rounds of quantitative easing., In earlier rounds, though, the Fed announced at the outset how long the program would last. This time, the Fed says it will keep buying bonds until the job market gets a lot better and that if that doesn't happen soon, the Fed will take even more action., That's what makes today's announcement such a big departure from what's come before. Here's the key language from today's statement:, If the outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially, the Committee will continue its purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a context of price stability ..., the Committee expects that a highly accommodative stance of monetary policy will remain appropriate for a considerable time after the economic recovery strengthens ..., Essentially, the Fed is saying: We are going to do whatever it takes to bring down unemployment (as long as inflation stays low)., The boldness of this statement will change people's expectations about the economy. And that may actually speed up the grindingly slow economic recovery in the real world.
Lean, finely textured beef, dubbed pink slime by critics, is frozen on a large drum as part of its manufacturing process at the Beef Products Inc.'s plant in S. Sioux City, Neb. in March., Lean, finely textured beef, dubbed pink slime by critics, is frozen on a large drum as part of its manufacturing process at the Beef Products Inc.'s plant in S. Sioux City, Neb. in March., Beef Products, Inc., the South Dakota company at the center of a firestorm this spring over its product labeled pink slime by critics, announced Thursday it is suing ABC News for defamation and $1.2 billion in damages., BPI alleges that ABC reporters and hosts made 200 false statements over the course of a month about BPI's product, known in the industry as lean, finely textured beef (LFTB)., [ABC] did this with malice, and they knew what they were doing, Dan Webb, an attorney with Winston &amp; Strawn LLP representing the company, told reporters at a press conference at the company's headquarters. They decided to destroy this business... and they decimated the product in the marketplace., ABC's report on March 7, and subsequent stories, led consumers to believe that LFTB was not actually beef and that it was unsafe, according to Webb., LFTB, BPI's sole product, is made from the trimmings of many cuts of beef. It's often added to ground beef at least until it became controversial earlier this year., Though other media outlets also questioned the product's safety, we picked the news organization we believed damaged [the company], Webb told reporters., Webb says the damages were caused by a sustained, night-after-night series of stories and ABC's creation of a blacklist of BPI's customers, including retailers like Safeway. And BPI says that ABC continued with its defamatory coverage even after BPI and others sent ABC evidence from U.S. Department of Agriculture, the Food and Drug Administration, food safety organizations and beef industry experts that LFTB is a safe, nutritious lean beef., Before the controversy exploded, BPI was a major supplier of lean finely textured beef to fast food outlets, the National School Lunch Program, and retail grocers around the country., When consumers learned it was highly processed and treated with ammonia to kill bacteria much like other meats they launched boycotts and protests, eventually succeeding in getting major retailers to drop it., Since then, the company says its LFTB production dropped from 5 million pounds to 2 million pounds. The company closed three out of its four plants and laid off more than 700 employees., The complaint was filed in a Circuit Court in Union County, S.D., ABC denies its reports were defamatory., The lawsuit is without merit, Jeffrey Schneider, senior vice president of ABC News, said in a statement. We will contest it vigorously., UPDATE 4:30 PM, Gregg Leslie, legal defense director for at the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press, tells The Salt that it's hard to say whether BPI's defamation suit will hold water in court. They will have show that ABC's statements were provably false, Leslie says. That's usually difficult to do., Leslie notes the case is reminiscent of a suit involving Food Lion, the grocer, which tried to sue ABC after the network sent Prime Time Live reporters undercover in 1992 to investigate claims that the retailer was selling spoiled meat. Footage captured with concealed cameras showed Food Lion workers redating expired meats and poultry, repackaging spoiled products for sale, and other questionable practices., The broadcast hurt the chain's business, and the ensuing lawsuit and appeals process lasted well over 10 years. But Food Lion eventually lost the suit.
Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke arrives for a dinner at the Jackson Hole Economic Symposium on Thursday., Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke arrives for a dinner at the Jackson Hole Economic Symposium on Thursday., Update at 12:31 p.m. ET. Federal Reserve Announces QE3:, The Federal Reserve announced it would spend $40 billion a month on bond purchases in an effort to stimulate the economy and drive the the unemployment rate down., The Wall Street Journal says that unlike the first two rounds of Quantitative Easing, this time the Fed will focus solely on buying mortgage-backed securities., In its statement, the Federal Reserve said the economy was growing but at a sluggish pace., The Committee is concerned that, without further policy accommodation, economic growth might not be strong enough to generate sustained improvement in labor market conditions, the Federal Open Market Committee said. Remember the Fed has a dual mandate from Congress: keep inflation and the unemployment rate in check., This action also represents an open-ended commitment on the part of the Federal Reserve, which said it was not concerned about inflation at this time., If the outlook for the labor market does not improve substantially, the Committee will continue its purchases of agency mortgage-backed securities, undertake additional asset purchases, and employ its other policy tools as appropriate until such improvement is achieved in a context of price stability, the Fed said. That last line means that the Fed promises to tweak this program if inflation begins to be a problem., Another big announcement, is that the Federal Reserve will keep its federal funds rate at near zero through mid-2015., Update at 12:55 p.m. ET. 'Operation Twist':, The Federal Reserve also announced that it was continuing its so-called Operation Twist until the end of the year., As CNBC explains it, that means that the Fed will continue its program of selling shorter-dated government debt and buying longer-term securities., That means that through the end of the year, the Fed will pump $85 billion a month into the U.S. economy., Update at 1:01 p.m. ET. Vote Was 12 to 1: , Only one of the Federal Reserve presidents voted against this new policy. The dissenter was Jeffrey Lacker, the head of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, who, according to the statement, opposed additional asset purchases and preferred to omit the description of the time period over which exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted., Update at 1:07 p.m. ET. Markets Rejoice: , The markets have reacted joyously to the new policy. The Dow jumped more than 100 points or 0.75 percent, while Nasdaq jumped nearly one percent., Update at 1:16 p.m. ET. The Scope Is Smaller: , The New York Times' Binyamin Applebaum puts QE3 in context:, The scale of the new effort is significantly smaller than the Fed's previous rounds of asset purchases. The Fed purchased about $100 billion in securities each month during those campaigns. It said Thursday that it would target a rate of about $40 billion a month during the current campaign, although unlike those earlier efforts, the volume is now subject to adjustment., The new purchases will mark the first time in more than two years that the Fed has expanded its holdings of mortgage bonds. That decision reflects the Fed's view that the housing market still needs help, and that lower rates on mortgage loans could provide significant benefits for the broader economy., Our Original Post Continues: , We've told you about the mounting hints of new action by the Federal Reserve. The last was issued by Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke in Jackson Hole, Wy., two weeks ago., Bernanke lamented the stagnant labor market and said the Fed remains ready to step in if needed., Bernanke stopped just short of saying that during its next meeting, which happens today, the Fed's Open Markets Committee would announce a new round of economic stimulus., So that's the big question before us today: Will the Federal Reserve announce a third round of quantitative easing? The Washington Post's Ezra Klein has a primer on what QE3 is. Essentially it's an unconventional monetary tool in which the Fed buys bonds or even mortgage-backed securities, which it hopes will bring down interest rates for mortgages and long-term loans., The Los Angeles Times reports that this close to an election, the decision is fraught with politics:, If the Fed announces another round of so-called quantitative easing, it also likely would give details about how much money it intends to spend on bonds and how it would spread that money among Treasury bonds, mortgage-backed securities and debt issued by government-backed agencies such as Fannie Mae., Expect political reaction to start rolling in shortly after the announcement, particularly from Republicans. Many of them have opposed the Fed's dramatic expansion of its balance sheet over the past four years and would be particularly upset about more stimulus action in the weeks before a presidential election., We'll know at 12:30 p.m. ET., when the Fed releases a statement on what they've decided at their meeting. As has become the norm, Bernanke will then hold a press conference at 2:15 p.m. ET., We'll update this post with the most recent news, so refresh the page to see the latest.
Rick Grimes (Andrew Lincoln) returns in October to fight more zombies in the hit AMC series The Walking Dead. But about 14 million people won't be able to see the premiere because of an ongoing dispute between AMC and satellite provider DISH Network, Rick Grimes (Andrew Lincoln) returns in October to fight more zombies in the hit AMC series The Walking Dead. But about 14 million people won't be able to see the premiere because of an ongoing dispute between AMC and satellite provider DISH Network, Back in March, the Season 2 finale of The Walking Dead, AMC's hit zombie drama, broke ratings records. The show returns on Oct. 14 for its third season. But for about 14 million people, there will be no flesh-eating zombies slowly walking across their TV screens. The show is produced by AMC, and all of AMC's channels have been cut by satellite provider DISH Network. Tiffs between networks and cable providers are common, but this one has gone on for record time., Grad student Mark Worth doesn't have a lot of time for TV, but when he can turn on the tube, he says, Breaking Bad and Mad Men are the two shows he always wants to watch. So in July, when Mark sat down in front of his 52-inch screen and found a movie playing instead of Mad Men, that was the end of his relationship with DISH., All the movie channels in the world ... aren't going to replace that, Worth says., Worth is one of the millions of customers caught in the middle of this feud between DISH and AMC. AMC Network's Chief Operating Officer Ed Carroll says cable networks and providers disagree all the time., You're hunkered down in a room and there's the bid and the ask and you're going back and forth, Carroll explains. Sometimes there's an extension period, an additional 24 hours, an additional 36 hours, and you come to an agreement., When things don't go so smoothly say, if the provider isn't willing to pay what the network is demanding for its channels those channels might disappear for a day or two. This happened not long ago when Viacom and DIRECTV had a spat. About 20 million viewers lost channels like MTV and Comedy Central for more than a week., DISH subscribers have been without any AMC channels for more than two months. Carroll says that in his 20 years at AMC, he's never seen a dispute drag on this long., AMC says DISH dropped its programming because it wants to gain leverage in an unrelated lawsuit. DISH, on the other hand, says the faceoff is over a practice called bundling. Cable providers hate bundling in which big networks like AMC try to sell several of their channels, both high- and low-rated, to providers in a bundle to get a better price. In this case, AMC wants DISH to buy Sundance IFC and WE tv, even if DISH only wants Mad Men., &ldquo; The problem is they're asking me to pay for four channels for really what is the price of three shows., - Dave Shull, DISH's senior vice president of programming, Dave Shull, DISH's senior vice president of programming, says this is a bad deal. The problem is they're asking me to pay for four channels for really what is the price of three shows, Shull says. So DISH isn't paying for any AMC shows., But AMC isn't giving up. It has turned to social media in a quest to get channels back on DISH. Last month, it launched a YouTube video contest for angry DISH subscribers called Hey DISH, Where's my AMC?, Sam Thielman covers television for AdWeek and has been closely following the dispute. If you look on Twitter, you can see people mostly yelling at DISH Network saying: 'Hey, where's our Breaking Bad?' he says. Since AMC was cut, DISH has lost some subscribers, though it's not quite a mass exodus, says Thielman., DISH fans of AMC's The Walking Dead are definitely getting nervous about how they're going to watch the season premiere. AMC might stream it online, but there's no way the zombie apocalypse is going to be as jaw-dropping on a laptop.
Give us a sign., We think of the power of the Federal Reserve as the power of money. After all, the Fed is the one institution that can create U.S. dollars out of thin air., But recently, Ben Bernanke has argued that the Fed has another, critical power: the power of words. And when you're the chairman of the Fed, a few words can go a long way., In a speech last month, Bernanke said this: The Federal Reserve will provide additional policy accommodation as needed to promote a stronger economic recovery ..., After the speech, the TV business channels went wild, suggesting that big Fed action was coming soon., But how does the magic work? How do a few cryptic words get everyone so worked up?, Joe Gagnon, a former Fed economist who now works for the Peterson Institute for International Economics, pointed to a single word in that one sentence: stronger Saying stronger recovery is making it clear that this recovery we've had to date is not strong enough, in their view, Gagnon said. That's a indication that they feel the need to do more. It's subtle. But sentences like that provide a signal to investors so they don't get surprised when the Fed wants to do something big. When trillions of dollars are at stake, surprise is bad. And as cryptic as it might sound sometimes, the Fed is now more clear and direct than its ever been in its history., Just 20 years ago, the Fed didn't even tell the public what it was thinking or doing. People had to watch money moving in the markets to figure out what the Fed had decided to do. These days, Ben Bernanke says that communication just talking, really is one of the most powerful tools he has. For instance, last year rather than just say they were keeping interest rate low, the Fed said it expected to keep the rate low for years. That was actually a very powerful impact on the markets, says Randall S. Kroszner of the University of Chicago, a former member of the Fed's Board of Governors. And if you looked at the futures markets for the short term interest rate, they actually moved quite a bit., The Fed will release a new policy statement this afternoon. Fed officials, if they want to, could simply extend that promise of low interest rates again. But if Bernanke really wants to test the power of talking, he could give a very detailed description of the plans for the future., The Fed could promise to keep interest rates low until, say, unemployment comes down to a certain level, or until the economy is growing at a certain clip., It would be a dramatic departure from the more subtle hints and coy language its used in the past. And there is a lot of debate in the economics world about whether or not it would work. But Bernanke may decide that extraordinary times call for extraordinary words to match.
Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke in a hearing of the Joint Economic Committee on Capitol Hill in June., Federal Reserve Chairman Ben S. Bernanke in a hearing of the Joint Economic Committee on Capitol Hill in June., Federal Reserve policymakers are meeting in Washington, trying to decide whether and exactly how to boost the sluggish economy. Many analysts are expecting the Fed to take action, but they're also beginning to question whether another stimulus program will have any effect., Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke made clear in a speech in Jackson Hole, Wyo., last month that he's not satisfied with the low level of economic growth and the high level of unemployment. He signaled quite clearly that Fed policymakers are considering a couple of actions to try to reduce interest rates further., One, says former Fed official Karen Dynan, is to say in their post-meeting statement that they're going to keep short-term rates lower, longer., Instead of keeping interest rates low for a really long time, they would keep interest rates low for a really, really long time until the end of 2015, she says., Currently, the Fed says rates are likely to remain low until the end of 2014., Dynan, who's now co-director of economic studies at the Brookings Institution, also says Bernanke's speech suggested that another round of bond-buying quantitative easing is in the offing. That action might be focused on Fed purchases of mortgage-backed securities, which could drive mortgage rates down further., The logic there is that our housing market remains in very poor shape. It may have turned the corner, but conditions still look pretty bleak, she says. And by going directly at mortgage-backed securities, they could have a more direct influence on mortgage rates., Under The Mattress, A Wall Street Journal survey of nearly 50 economists found that more than half of them think the Fed will announce another round of quantitative easing and almost as many think it would be a mistake., Peter Fisher, a senior managing director at the investment firm BlackRock, says he thinks the Fed's efforts to move long-term interest rates lower is in danger of becoming counterproductive., I'm worried that pushing down long-term rates too far will lead us into what John Maynard Keynes called a 'liquidity trap,' he says., In a liquidity trap, long-term rates become so low that, for instance, retirees aren't compensated adequately for the risks of tying up their money in a long-term bond or CD, so they just save in very short-term instruments, like money market funds., The most extreme form of the liquidity trap is where you don't want to have your money in the bank, you want to put it under the mattress, Fisher says., How To Get The Money Flowing, When people put their money in the figurative mattress, or only save in very short-term instruments, Fisher says their savings aren't available to be lent out for long-term investments, which help the economy grow. Their savings don't circulate as fast as they should in the economy., The Dark Ages was a period of very low money velocity, Fisher says. It was all in the vaults of the castles and the monasteries. It wasn't circulating out there in the economy., Fisher hastens to add that we're not headed back to the Dark Ages, but he says the Fed's policy may be encouraging the opposite of what it intends., Part of the Fed's strategy is to force interest rates so low that savers look for higher yields by investing in the stock market, which helps U.S. businesses grow. It's clear that's helping fuel a big stock market rise., But Fisher says he believes savers are also essentially taking their money out of the economy and hoarding their cash like medieval lords. In fact, he says, measures of money velocity continue to fall, which is unusual this far into a recovery.
Telemarketers at work at an InfoCision call center. The for-profit company solicits millions in charitable donations each year and also provides marketing services to for-profit clients., Telemarketers at work at an InfoCision call center. The for-profit company solicits millions in charitable donations each year and also provides marketing services to for-profit clients., Americans donate billions of dollars to charity each year, and a portion of that money is raised by telemarketing solicitations., Some of those charitable contributions are solicited by InfoCision Management Corp., an Ohio-based telemarketing company that, on its website, claims to raise more money for nonprofit organizations over the phone than any other company n the world., InfoCision holds, or has held, contracts with some of the biggest American charities, including the American Diabetes Association, the American Cancer Society and the March of Dimes Foundation, among many others including some public broadcasting stations., But an investigative report in the October issue of Bloomberg Markets magazine found that, in many cases, most of the money raised by InfoCision never makes it to the nonprofits the company says it's supporting., The report, by Bloomberg senior writer David Evans, focuses on one technique used by InfoCision solicitors: campaigns in which telemarketers ask people to distribute pre-printed letters among their neighbors on behalf of a charity. Those letter recipients, in turn, are asked to send monetary donations to the charity., Evans explains to All Things Considered host Audie Cornish how InfoCision has raised millions of dollars for charity but that, in some cases, InfoCision kept much, and sometimes all, of that money, while also misrepresenting how much of a donor's contribution would reach those in need., On the telemarketing campaign Bloomberg Markets studied, Below is a statement from Steve Brubaker, InfoCision's chief of staff, in response to the Bloomberg Markets Magazine report. , For 30 years, InfoCision has partnered with the largest and most reputable nonprofit organizations in the world. If the calls we make for charities were unsuccessful for them and if our clients were unhappy, we would not be able to continue representing them. Many of our clients have been with us for 20+ years demonstrating we are providing value and integrity on a daily basis., It's important to understand that most charities use telemarketing as part of their overall fundraising strategy. Without proactively attempting to renew lapsed members or acquire new members, any charity will ultimately lose its membership through normal attrition and in time may no longer exist. Once the lapsed member has been renewed or the new member has been acquired, all their subsequent gifts will provide significant net return to the client over time., For-profit businesses roll out new customer acquisition types of campaigns all the time, such as free giveaways of sample products. Consumers don't question this strategy even though it drives up marketing costs. Stores use what's called loss leaders to get people through their doors. They'll take a loss on say a gallon of milk in hopes the consumer will purchase other marked-up items in the same trip and become a regular customer because of their shopping experience., A casual look at the solicitation reports with the various state attorneys-general gives an incomplete view of acquisition campaigns. Anyone who is looking to determine the overall allocation of resources which a nonprofit organization commits to its core mission should review the nonprofit's Form 990 filed each year with the IRS, which provides a comprehensive summary of an organization's good stewardship of the funds entrusted to them., [InfoCision telemarketers] call and they say they're not asking for money, but they're asking for you to volunteer and to send out a solicitation letter to 15 of your friends or neighbors. And people perceive that since they're saving the charity the stamp, that this is actually an efficient way to raise money., On how much charities typically receive from InfoCision fundraising efforts, We found for a four-year period, from 2007 to 2010, InfoCision raised about $425 million for nonprofits, and most of that ... 52 percent was kept by InfoCision, with the minority going to the charities. And in the case of some charities, it was actually much, much less than that. ..., [In one campaign] we found the American Cancer Society never got more than half and typically they got less than half of the money raised. In some cases they got zero. In 2010, it was even worse than that. In 2010 the contract with InfoCision estimated that the cancer society would get 44 percent of the money. The script that was being used, that was approved by the cancer society, told folks that about 70 percent of the money overall was going to the cancer society., In fact, when the reports came in, we found the filings that showed how much the cancer society actually got for 2010. And it was zero. And in fact, the cancer society had to pay $113,000 to InfoCision in addition to turning over the $5.4 million that had been raised., On why charities would agree to contracts in which they would lose money, The [American] Cancer Society referred to it as a 'loss leader.' They said that they hope that the people who participate in these telemarketing programs eventually become donors; that over time they become profitable donors to the charities. ..., The American Diabetes Association told us that they're hoping to get names that they can get more money from in the future. But ... Richard Erb, a vice president of the American Diabetes Association, told me, 'If we came into it and said, 'Geez, I'm not going to make a dime on this,' do you think we'd have anyone who'd give us money?', Listen to a 2009 InfoCision call on behalf of the American Cancer Society, placed to the home of an investigator for the Ohio Attorney General's Office., In other words, they can't tell people the truth in order to get money through telemarketing, so they have to conceal the vast amount of money that's actually going to the telemarketer. So far as they're concerned, as long as they're getting a little money, it's better than getting no money., On how InfoCision telemarketers misrepresent themselves on the phone, The most alarming thing that we found is that the solicitors are taught, using scripts, to lie. To tell people that most of the money is going to the charity, when in fact, most of the money is going to InfoCision., On the legality of the telemarketing practices, It's definitely illegal to lie. InfoCision paid a $75,000 fine in February to the Ohio Attorney General's Office, after they were accused of lying about the amount of money that was going to the charities. And they were also accused of having their employees pose as volunteers in order to coax money out of donors., On how donors can avoid pitfalls with their charitable donations, An important thing people can do is research. And not to be responding to a telemarketer's call, but to do your due diligence, and find out if this is a charity that you really want to give to.
After falling during the recession, the number of Americans with full-time jobs increased last year., But median earnings for full-time workers fell. (Also: The wage gap between men and women did not change.), Real earnings for full-time workers from 1967 to 2011, Real earnings for full-time workers from 1967 to 2011, And household income was stagnant across the income spectrum., These figures, from a Census Bureau report released this morning, aren't surprising. But they are a reminder of the fact that, while high unemployment remains a big problem for the U.S. labor market, it's not the only problem. There's also a long-term stagnation in real earnings for people who have jobs., On a less-grim note, the report also found that the percentage of Americans without health insurance fell last year. Here's more on that.
Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney campaigns at PR Machine Works in Mansfield, Ohio, on Monday., Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney's proposal to overhaul the tax code continues to draw scrutiny., Romney says it is possible to cut tax rates without driving the government deeper into the red, and that he can make up for the lost revenue by closing tax loopholes. But analysts have had a hard time testing Romney's claim because he hasn't offered many specifics., When he was pressed by NBC's David Gregory this weekend to give an example of a loophole he would close, Romney didn't offer much detail., &ldquo; It's a general rule of politics ... that politicians promise all things to all people and never promise pain unless their back is to a wall., - Bruce Bartlett, author of The Benefit and the Burden, Well, I can tell you that people at the high end high-income taxpayers will have fewer deductions and exemptions, Romney said., That's not good enough for President Obama, who says Romney's plan lacks a basic ingredient: math., When you ask them, well, 'How are you going to do it?' well, they won't answer real clearly, Obama said at a recent rally. But there are only a few ways of doing it, and most of them involve sticking it to the middle class., Obama often cites a study by the nonpartisan Tax Policy Center, which found that under Romney's plan, middle-class families would have to give up some of their popular tax breaks like the deduction for mortgage interest in order to offset the cost of cutting taxes for the rich., The authors said anything else is not mathematically possible., To an economist, those are very strong words, says Princeton economist Harvey Rosen., Rosen, a former adviser to George W. Bush, set out to prove Romney's critics wrong., Obviously, I'm a Republican, Rosen says, [and] it kind of raised my hackles slightly to see the proposal being characterized as 'mathematically impossible.' , Rosen's study was similar to the Tax Policy Center's. He first looked at how much money the government would lose by lowering tax rates on the wealthy, then tried to figure out how much it could recoup by closing loopholes. Rosen came to the opposite conclusion: that you can cut tax rates for wealthy Americans without shifting costs onto the middle class., So it's not mathematically impossible, he says., Why the difference? Partly because the two studies make different assumptions about what tax loopholes might be on the chopping block. The Tax Policy Center assumes Romney would not want to eliminate tax breaks designed to encourage savings and investment, like IRAs and tax-exempt government bonds. Rosen, however, assumes some of those breaks could be phased out., Of course, Rosen says Romney could easily settle this debate, simply by spelling out which tax loopholes he'd do away with., We wouldn't have to be guessing, he says. But the kind of specificity that an academic might think is very cool might not make sense for a politician., In fact, Romney is following a well-worn political path. Bruce Bartlett, author of The Benefit and the Burden, a book on tax policy, says politicians are typically much more specific about the benefits of the tax cuts they're proposing than the burden of the loopholes they want to close., It's a general rule of politics, dating back to at least Cicero, that politicians promise all things to all people and never promise pain unless their back is to a wall, Bartlett says., In fairness, Obama has been equally vague in discussing his own plans for tax reform. He agrees with most policy experts that a tax code with lower rates and fewer loopholes would be more efficient. But like Romney, he hasn't spelled out which loopholes he'd cut. Bartlett says that omission is less glaring in the president's case., Obama has not made tax reform, by any stretch of the imagination, the centerpiece of his campaign, he says. Whereas I think it would be hard for people off the top of their heads to say what else Mitt Romney stands for., For now, tax analysts and voters will just have to keep guessing about how Romney's plan would work, and decide whether they trust the candidate to fill in the details after the election.
Chicago public school teachers picket outside William H.Wells Community High School on Monday., Chicago public school teachers picket outside William H.Wells Community High School on Monday., The strike that shut schools in Chicago on Monday illustrates a larger, national trend: Teachers unions are having a harder time getting what they want., For decades, teachers unions have been among the most powerful lobbying groups in nearly every state and have been arguably even more powerful at the local level, where they've often been able to unseat school board members and even mayors who crossed them., Although they've been criticized in the past, they have not been under any real pressure to change, says Tim Daly, president of The New Teacher Project, which helps train and place teachers., That's no longer the case. Since the 2010 elections, four states Idaho, Indiana, Tennessee and Wisconsin have either eliminated or largely curbed collective bargaining rights for teachers., The result of these laws, along with widespread teacher layoffs due to state and local budget woes, has been a sudden and rapid decline in union membership. The National Education Association, the largest teachers union, has lost 100,000 members since 2010, leaving it with a membership of about 3 million. The NEA projects it could lose 200,000 more by 2014., The political and policy challenges that teachers unions face have left them with two choices, says Richard Kearney, a political scientist at North Carolina State University: They can take a more collaborative approach and seek to embrace and shape ideas that they have largely opposed to this point; or they can stand their ground when it comes to questions about personnel management, which is exactly what's happening now in Chicago., How the strike plays out and what the public thinks about the arguments the Chicago Teachers Union is putting forward could have a big influence on how teachers unions fare nationally in the coming years., It's impossible to overstate how much the debate has changed over the past 10 years, says Andrew Rotherham, a co-founder of Bellwether Education Partners, which advocates for low-income students, and a columnist for Time. The unions have to figure out how to adapt to this new environment., A Shifting Landscape, There was a time, in the not-too-distant past, when teachers unions dominated public debate about education and won broad sympathy with their calls for higher salaries and smaller classroom sizes., The conversation simply couldn't proceed without them and you couldn't make changes without getting their buy-in before, Daly says., To cite just one example, the California Teachers Association had no trouble raising $50 million from its members in 2005 to defeat a ballot measure that would have extended the amount of time it would take new teachers to get tenure from two years to five years., Unions have objected, to a greater or lesser degree, to many of the other so-called reforms that have been promoted in recent years, including the growth of charter schools, changes in teacher evaluation and offering merit or differential pay for higher-performing teachers., The union philosophy is one that emphasizes consistency, that individuals workers are all going to get the same salary and working conditions, as much as possible, says Paul Kersey, director of labor policy at the conservative Illinois Policy Institute., Outgunned And Under Attack, The thing is, the general public has come to favor many of these ideas. Teachers unions are also having a hard time gaining public sympathy because their members are often no longer seen as underpaid, as was generally the case 20 years ago. Average teacher salaries vary widely by state (and even by district), ranging from a low of $39,850 in South Dakota to $72,708 in New York, according to NEA figures., If you're the union going to the mattresses defending a 30 percent pay raise for these guys at a time of 8 percent unemployment, that's probably not the best story line, says Rick Hess, director of education policy studies at the conservative American Enterprise Institute., Mitt Romney, the Republican nominee for president, wasted no time castigating the Chicago Teachers Union for its action., Teachers unions have too often made plain that their interests conflict with those of our children, and today we are seeing one of the clearest examples yet, he said in a statement., Kearney, an expert on labor relations in the public sector, says that the attack on teachers unions is part of the broader assault on public sector unions that has held them to blame for the skyrocketing pension and health costs many governments face., With the Supreme Court decision in Citizens United, there have been vast amounts of superPAC money overwhelming the amount of money that unions and their allies can raise to defend themselves, he says., With Frenemies Like This ..., Unions have also sometimes found themselves at odds with their traditional allies in the Democratic Party. When Vice President Biden addressed the American Federation of Teachers in July, some members of the Chicago union held up signs protesting Obama administration education policies., The administration's Race to the Top grant program promotes ideas, such as merit pay and more stringent teacher evaluation systems, that are among the sticking points in Chicago., The unions know the education landscape has shifted, says AEI's Hess. They see that the center of gravity among Democrats has moved toward education reform., The teachers unions are backing Obama, but, as NPR's StateImpact reports, their support for Democrats is no longer a given., During his inaugural address last year, Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel said he rejected the anti-union policies of Republican governors in Wisconsin and Ohio. But, he added, We will do no favors to our city employees or our taxpayers if we let outdated rules and outmoded practices make important government services too costly to deliver., Still A Big Voice, There are examples of unions embracing and promoting new ideas. In Denver, for instance, a merit-pay system was adopted with input from the union., For the sake of the students and the sake of the system itself, there needs to be a willingness from all sides to look for practical solutions, says Henry Roman, president of the Denver Classroom Teachers Association., The education reform ideas that have taken root over the past decade have not always resulted in the type of improvements in student achievement that were initially promised. Some of the success stories have come precisely in those places where districts and states worked collaboratively with unions, who after all represent the teachers that carry out any changes in the classroom., We want to be part of the solution because we are part of the system, Dennis Van Roekel, the president of the National Education Association, told a conference of state legislators in Chicago last month. You can't make good, sustained change unless you engage all the people in the system all of them., Some observers say that the NEA, which has long been viewed as more recalcitrant than the AFT in terms of embracing new ideas, has come around lately, given the major threat its loss of membership represents., Still, policy ideas that change the way teachers are evaluated and managed remain a tough sell to the unions' own membership. Teachers unions are likely to struggle to persuade their members to accept contracts that call for such changes in a time when budget pressures are leading to widespread layoffs., Education is like a bad marriage, where we've fought about everything else except the real, underlying issue, says Rotherham, the education consultant. That's personnel, which leads invariably to the unions.
Remember the dark days of 2008 when insurer American International Group Inc., better known as AIG, nearly collapsed under the weight of the mortgage crisis before Washington rode to the rescue to the tune of $182 billion?, Then there was the public outrage when AIG executives got millions in bonuses after receiving the largest of all of the Wall Street bailouts., Since then, the New York-based insurance giant has been essentially a government-owned enterprise, with Uncle Sam holding a controlling share., But that's about to change. In four tranches in recent months, the government has sold off shares in AIG for $23.3 billion, reducing its stake from 92 percent. When the latest sell-off is complete, the government stake will go down from about 53 percent to just 23 percent., Bloomberg reports: , The U.S. needs to average about $28.73 on the sales to break even on the stake it acquired as part of the bailout, excluding unpaid dividends and fees, according to the Government Accountability Office. The first two offerings were priced at $29 a share, and the second two at $30.50 apiece. ..., AIG is the last U.S. insurer that hasn't yet ended its bailout. The government has already divested its holdings in most of the largest U.S. banks including Citigroup Inc. and Bank of America Corp. while retaining a majority stake in Ally Financial Inc., The Associated Press says AIG has sold off several different units in order to raise money to pay off its debt to the government., The insurer has been profitable the last two years and is expected to post a net profit of $7.4 billion in the year through this December. CEO Robert Benmosche said last month the company was close to its goal of repaying the government everything it provided to AIG during the financial crisis 'plus a profit.'
The Real Thing: A model poses on Friday at the Kate Spade show during New York Fashion Week. In The Knockoff Economy, Kal Raustiala and Christopher Sprigman argue that copying major designers is good both for the industry and for consumers., During New York Fashion Week, designers will present looks that you might find in a department store next spring ... or, as knockoffs at Forever 21. That's because copying fashion designs is perfectly legal and that's a good thing, if you ask Kal Raustiala., Raustiala is the co-author of a new book called The Knockoff Economy: How Imitation Sparks Innovation. He talks with NPR's Renee Montagne about who copies fashion designs, why it's legal and how copying ultimately benefits the consumer and the industry., On why copying is a good thing for the fashion industry, The first is that fashion relies on trends, and trends rely on copying. So you can think of copying as a turbocharger that spins the fashion cycle faster, so things come into fashion faster, they go out of fashion faster, and that makes fashion designers want to come up with something new because we want something new. We're sick of what's out there., The second is that copying helps condense the market into something that consumers can understand, so people want to follow trends, they want to be able to dress in a way that's in style; they have to understand that., How Imitation Sparks Innovation, by Kal Raustiala and Christopher Sprigman, Hardcover, 272 pages | purchase, More on this book:, On the winners, the losers and the 'big picture', There are designers that get hurt by knockoffs. And we're very sympathetic to that. But when we think about what our law should permit, we need to think about the big picture: What's going to grow this industry and make it successful, create jobs, create a robust sector. And in doing that, I think it's clear that the American approach is to allow copying in the apparel industry., On why fashion is not protected under copyright law, Copyright law does not address things that are useful. So, for example, clothing, we have tended to think about in American law as something that you know, we wear it to stay warm, to cover our bodies, so it has a functional dimension. So as a result, it's not considered a proper subject for copyright. Copyright is really meant for things like forms of art, literature, poetry, music, film, etc. Now, of course, fashion has a big artistic component to it. ... It could be [protected by patent laws], and sometimes fashion items are. So, for example, handbags and shoes sometimes are covered by design patents. But, it's unusual to do that because, 1) it's very expensive to get a patent, and 2) patents require a standard of novelty and originality that's often hard to reach in the fashion industry, where many things are reworkings of previous things., On who copies in fashion, We tend to think about copying and knockoffs as something that either happens in a store like Forever 21, or some of these firms that specialize in knockoff dresses, like Prom Girl or Faviana, which are companies where you literally go to their websites and they say: Here's the original, and here's our version of it., ... And they're very upfront about it. They don't try to hide it. They trumpet that fact. Now, that's a big part of the knockoff industry in fashion. But at the higher levels you see it as well ... there it's a little more subtle, [and] there's even been, in other countries, where copying in the fashion industry is illegal, there have even been lawsuits about it. [Ralph Lauren lost in a lawsuit brought by Yves Saint Laurent in France.], On consumers, who reap the benefits of copying and competition, By no means is copying limited to the lower end. But I think in practice, the majority of copying that we see in the fashion industry is lower down in price. And that has some positive effects. So, regardless of the effects on the industry overall, it's good for consumers in the sense that copying breeds competition. When you have copies, it means you have multiple things competing in the marketplace that are similar. And if they compete on price, then consumers have an option that they wouldn't otherwise have., Read an excerpt of The Knockoff Economy
President Obama spoke at a campaign event at Strawbery Banke Museum in Portsmouth, N.H., on Friday., President Obama spoke at a campaign event at Strawbery Banke Museum in Portsmouth, N.H., on Friday., It wasn't what President Obama was hoping for: another disappointing jobs report the morning after he accepted the Democratic nomination and asked Americans to stay the course., The U.S. economy added just 96,000 jobs last month, according to the Labor Department, and a drop in the unemployment rate to 8.1 percent was mostly due to people giving up on job searches., Still, a number of analysts say the latest economic numbers likely won't change voters' minds., Both political parties were quick to pounce on the data released hours after the Democratic National Convention wrapped up in Charlotte, N.C. Republicans painted the report as more evidence of Obama's failed policies, while Democrats said the recovery will take more time and that it has been hamstrung by the lockstep partisan divide in Congress., If last night was the party, this morning is the hangover, GOP presidential nominee Mitt Romney said in a statement. It's clear that President Obama just hasn't lived up to his promises and his policies haven't worked. We aren't better off than we were four years ago., Obama, who made a quiet exit from Charlotte en route to campaign stops in Iowa and New Hampshire, initially left the task of responding to the jobs report to his staff:, Today's unemployment report provides further evidence that the U.S. economy is continuing to recover from the worst downturn since the Great Depression, Alan Krueger, chairman of the White House Council of Economic Advisers, said in a statement. He emphasized that the downturn began in December 2007, a full year before Obama took office., Later, on the stump in New Hampshire, the president contrasted the August job gains to the massive job losses when he took office. We need to create more jobs, faster, he said., Romney running mate Paul Ryan told CNBC: This is not even close to what a recovery looks like., The latest employment numbers may be deflating, but they seem unlikely to change the course of an election just two months away, says Allan Louden, a professor of presidential politics at Wake Forest University in Winston-Salem, N.C., That ship has sailed, Louden says., Sure, for the Democrats, it steps on any afterlife of the convention, he says, but at this point, a good or bad jobs report might have a marginal, but not significant, impact on attitudes., Susan Drucker, a professor of political communication at Hofstra University, notes that Obama, Bill Clinton and other Democratic speakers this week sought to reframe the economic recovery as a marathon rather than a sprint., My impression is that public reaction to this jobs report will be the first test of that reframing, she says., Obama campaign adviser Robert Gibbs today reiterated what has become a monthly mantra from the White House, saying the president understands we still have a long way to go., House Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi blamed Republicans for standing in the way of growth and certainty for our economy., Indeed, employers may be leery of hiring amid uncertainty over the looming fiscal cliff., Nigel Gault, chief U.S. economist at IHS Global Insight, says businesses are feeling anxious about what lies ahead, given the partisan impasse in Congress that has delayed key decisions about tax rates and threatens to slash government spending., It creates enormous uncertainty and is surely having a depressing effect on hiring, he says., And there's still one pre-election jobs report, due a month from now. What if things looked a lot better (or a lot worse)?, People's views on the economy over the past four years are pretty well established, Gault says. If we did see some improvement over the next month or two, I doubt that is really going to convince people that the big picture is a lot different.
At a job fair in San Diego this week, Navy Sailor E-5 Cedric Washington spoke to Sim Garriotti from Lockheed Martin while interviewing for a potential position., At a job fair in San Diego this week, Navy Sailor E-5 Cedric Washington spoke to Sim Garriotti from Lockheed Martin while interviewing for a potential position., The number of jobs on private and public payrolls grew by just 96,000 in August from July, the Bureau of Labor Statistics said this morning., Meanwhile, the nation's unemployment rate edged down to 8.1 percent from 8.3 percent the month before. Often, the jobless rate dips even when employment growth is weak because the size of the labor force shrank as many Americans gave up looking for work., It's a report that will surely add to the presidential campaign rhetoric., We'll have more from the report shortly, so hit your refresh button to see our latest updates., Update at 9:50 a.m. ET. White House Says Report Is Evidence Of Recovery:, While there is more work that remains to be done, today's employment report provides further evidence that the U.S. economy is continuing to recover from the worst downturn since the Great Depression, writes the president's top economic adviser, Alan Krueger, on the White House blog. He also focuses on the section of the BLS report that shows private sector establishments added 103,000 jobs last month, and overall non-farm payroll employment rose by 96,000. The economy has now added private sector jobs for 30 straight months, for a total of 4.6 million jobs during that period., Update at 9:35 a.m. ET. What Will Stocks Do?, There was a big rally Thursday on Wall Street, partly in anticipation of what some thought would be a good news on the jobs front. So will stocks tank today? USA Today's John Waggonner says maybe not, because until the economy starts creating more jobs, the Fed is going to be fighting to keep interest rates low and that's good for stocks. The Wall Street Journal also says today's report makes it more likely the Fed will try to give the economy a boost., And at the start of trading, stocks appear to be holding steady., So, in the sometimes bizarro world of Wall Street, bad news = good news., Update at 9:10 a.m. ET. Big Decline In Labor Force:, There were 368,000 fewer people counted as being part of the labor force in August than in July, BLS says. That largely accounts for the drop in the official unemployment rate., Among the reasons for that decline was an increase in those considered to be marginally attached to the labor force. According to BLS, these individuals were not in the labor force, wanted and were available for work, and had looked for a job sometime in the prior 12 months. They were not counted as unemployed because they had not searched for work in the 4 weeks preceding the survey., Update at 9:06 a.m. ET. We Aren't Better Off, Romney Says:, If last night was the party, this morning is the hangover, Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney says in a statement just emailed to reporters by his campaign. He adds that:, For every net new job created, nearly four Americans gave up looking for work entirely. This is more of the same for middle class families who are suffering through the worst economic recovery since the Great Depression. After 43 straight months of unemployment above 8 percent, it is clear that President Obama just hasn't lived up to his promises and his policies haven't worked. We aren't better off than they were four years ago. My plan for a stronger middle class will create 12 million new jobs by the end of my first term. America deserves new leadership that will get our economy moving again., Update at 9:05 a.m. ET. Where The Jobs Were:, Food services and drinking places: Up by 28,000., Professional and technical services: Up by 27,000., Health care: Up by 17,000., Computer systems design and related services: Up by 11,000., Manufacturing: Down by 15,000., Update at 9 a.m. ET. Average Monthly Gain Is Down:, Since the beginning of this year, BLS says, employment growth has averaged 139,000 per month, compared with an average monthly gain of 153,000 in 2011., It adds that in August, employment rose in food services and drinking places, in professional and technical services, and in health care., Update at 8:55 a.m. ET. Could Overshadow Obama's Convention Speech:, The Associated Press calls the 96,000-gain in jobs a weak figure that could slow any momentum President Barack Obama hoped to gain from his speech to the Democratic National Convention., Update at 8:50 a.m. ET. Obama Deserves An F, GOP Chairman Says:, Time is up, Mr. President, tweets Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus. More of the same is not good enough. This isn't an incomplete, it's an F., Update at 8:45 a.m. ET. Stuck Above 8 Percent:, The nation's jobless rate has been above 8 percent since February 2009. Its recent peak was 10 percent, in October 2009, and it has now touched 8.1 percent twice (the other time, in April this year). Republicans and GOP nominee Mitt Romney will surely focus on how the rate has remained high through President Obama's first term. Democrats and the White House will say again that President Obama inherited an economic crisis and that more time is needed to fully recover., Update at 8:40 a.m. ET. July Job Growth Revised Downward:, BLS now says that 141,000 jobs were added to payrolls in July. That's down from the agency's preliminary estimate of a 163,000-gain., Our original post High Unemployment &amp; Slow Job Growth: Likely News From Today's Report:, Expect to hear this morning that employers added 125,000 to 130,000 jobs to their payrolls in August and that the nation's unemployment rate stayed at 8.3 percent, economists tell Reuters and Bloomberg News., The takeaway from such numbers would be that job growth remains sluggish and unemployment remains high. In other words, more of the same., Yes, it's time again for the monthly numbers that hit home for most Americans when they think about how the economy is doing. They're also the numbers that get talked about most on the campaign trail and could have a big impact on who gets elected president in November., Our colleagues over at Planet Money have posted a look at Jobs In America, In 2 Graphs. As they write:, Three years into the recovery, the U.S. jobs picture is still bleak. There are 4.8 million fewer jobs today than there were in January 2008, the month when employment peaked. But ... the story becomes more nuanced when you look across different sectors of the economy., The BLS report is due at 8:30 a.m. ET. We'll update this post after the news is out and follow the analyses and reactions.
See photos of Peter Frew and other tailors in this slide show from The New York Times Magazine., Peter Frew is one of a tiny number of people left in the United States who can entirely on his own, using almost no machinery make a classic bespoke suit. He can measure you, draw a pattern, cut the fabric and then hand-stitch a suit designed to fit your body perfectly., Frew spent more than a decade as an apprentice for a remarkable tailor in his native Jamaica. He now sells his suits for about $4,000. Since New York is filled with very rich people who see their suits as an essential uniform, Frew has all the orders he can handle., When I first heard about Frew and his remarkable skill, I thought: That guy must make a fortune. I was wrong., It turns out, all the orders he can handle is not that many orders. It takes him 75 hours to make just one suit. He makes about two suits a month. And after expenses fine English wool costs a lot Frew takes home less than $50,000 a year., That's not even enough for Frew to buy one of his own suits. In fact, Frew doesn't own a suit at all he can't bring himself to buy a suit off the rack., Most of us, though, are happy to buy mass-produced suits. They might not be perfect, but they're decent and they keep getting better. The big suit-making factories in China, Bangladesh and Pakistan use advanced sewing machines and chemical applications that are nowhere near as good as bespoke, but are a lot better than they used to be. And every year, they get better., The traditional methods, on the other hand, don't change. And they cost a fortune. Frew hopes that someday, he'll have a store in Manhattan and a staff of tailors making suits. But he says he's fine if his big dreams don't come true., He just loves what he does. He loves hand-making perfect suits., For more, see Adam Davidson's column in The New York Times Magazine.
This Panera Cares store in Chicago switched from for-profit to nonprofit this summer, and it started asking customers to pay whatever they want., This Panera Cares store in Chicago switched from for-profit to nonprofit this summer, and it started asking customers to pay whatever they want., The concept of pay what you want for goods and services is a nostalgic throwback to the days when people trusted one another just a little bit more, and it's something you expect to see at the occasional farm stand or at a hip, independent coffee shop., But recently, the sandwich and coffee giant Panera decided to get into the business with Panera Cares, a nonprofit version of the national chain. The company takes existing stores and donates the entire setup to the foundation. The money the store makes pays for the operations. Any additional profits go to local charities., They feel like every other Panera Cafe in America; they don't feel the least bit different, says Ron Shaich, co-founder and co-CEO of Panera Bread Co. Well, there is one difference customers will see: There's a donation box where the cash registers were., Shaich is also president of the Panera Foundation, which runs the Panera Cares that recently replaced the Panera that had been a fixture of the Lakeview area of Chicago. He sees the cafes as a way for the company to help the community and raise awareness about middle-class food insecurity., Lakeview is the fourth Panera Cares in the country, and Chicago is its biggest market yet. Panera does not track the numbers exactly, but it says roughly 20 percent of Panera Cares customers give more than they're asked. An additional 60 percent donate the suggested amount. The rest pay less or nothing., While some customers were a bit confused by the donation boxes when earlier stores opened a couple of years ago, Chicago resident Laura Lamar says when the Lakeside Panera became a Panera Cares, it didn't really change her routine: Her coffee used to cost $1.79 a cup. Now, she just gives them $2, and tells them to keep the change., It's just, what, 21 cents, Lamar says. It's not going to make a difference in my life, but it might help somebody else, and if everybody just gave an extra quarter or 50 cents it would make a difference., But does it make sense for a business?, Robert Gertner, deputy dean of the University of Chicago's Booth School of Business, says it's a fairly unusual model for a for-profit company. It's very rare where you see companies where their charitable activities are a nonprofit version, if you like, of what they do, he says., Gertner says it's hard to replicate this model well. He points to Ben &amp; Jerry's, which has had a similar effort for decades. The ice cream company created partner shops where they waived the franchise fee, which was then run by local nonprofits., The results, he says, were mixed, but in the long run, it did not really work out: Ben &amp; Jerry's at one time had more than a dozen partner shops. Today, it has only three., I think it's something of a challenge to make it work well, Gertner says. We'll see if it works well for Panera Cares., Gertner thinks Panera has a chance. The nonprofit stores may even inspire more loyalty from customers and employees, who feel like they're making a difference. He says people are always more likely to give toward an immediate, easy-to-understand need like providing a meal, rather than for something abstract., So far, Panera says this cafe, like the other locations, is paying for itself.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index rose to levels it hasn't hit in more than four years today, bolstered by the European Central Bank's plan to buy bonds of struggling countries to help support the euro. Strong U.S. jobs data also contributed to the gains., The broad S&P; 500 index soared 2 percent to close at 1432.12, its highest point since January 2008., The Dow Jones Industrial Index nearly matched that gain, rising by 1.9 percent (244.52 points) to reach 13,292, its highest close since December 2007. And the Nasdaq Composite Index outpaced both of them,, tacking on 2.2 percent to reach 3135.81 its highest mark since November 2000, according to The Wall Street Journal., About two weeks ago, the S&P; 500 briefly reached 1,426 in mid-day trading. At the time, it was the highest level the index had reached since May 2008 and like Thursday's gains, that Aug. 21 spike was attributed to expectations that the European Central Bank would buy bonds to help Europe's struggling economies., One notable change since that date is the removal of Sears from the Standard &amp; Poor's index. The venerable American retailer's last day on the S&P; 500 was Tuesday. Its place was taken by LyondellBasell, a Dutch chemicals company whose stock rose 3.15 percent Thursday.
Traders on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange on Aug. 9. Economic developments on both sides of the Atlantic could have a big impact on the U.S. presidential election., Traders on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange on Aug. 9. Economic developments on both sides of the Atlantic could have a big impact on the U.S. presidential election., As the political conventions wrap up, talking points concerning the economy may seem locked into place: Growth is continuing, but at a slow pace., Don't be fooled., There's still plenty of time for big surprises, and Thursday provided a stunning example. Stock prices shot to highs not seen in years., September and October tend to be very volatile months, says Stanley J.G. Crouch, chief investment officer of Aegis Capital Corp., a money management firm., After the European Central Bank announced an aggressive plan to deal with the eurozone debt crisis, U.S. stocks started climbing, and climbing some more. The Dow Jones industrial average ended the day up 245 points at 13,292, the highest close since before the Great Recession began in late 2007., The euphoria on Wall Street grew out of events in Germany, where the ECB said it would continue to hold down interest rates and launch a program to buy European government bonds. Stocks in European and U.S. markets took off., The reaction reflected relief. Investors now are more hopeful that European officials can hammer out a permanent solution to the complicated debt troubles that have been weighing down their governments., Crouch said events in Europe are important to U.S. investors because any banking crisis over there could roil financial markets here., Ever since we went to a global economy, there really is no separation in terms of national borders, he said. The world financial markets are inextricably linked., But investors should hold on to their hats; this month's ride could turn bumpy at any moment. In fact, Friday morning could bring a new jolt when the U.S. Labor Department releases its monthly unemployment report at 8:30., Most economists have been predicting that employers added just 125,000 jobs in August and that the unemployment rate held at about July's 8.3 percent level., But those forecasts could turn out to be wrong. Thursday actually brought some signs there could be a surprise on the upside. Payroll processor ADP said private employers added 201,000 jobs in August, and outplacement firm Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas said layoffs hit a 20-month low last month. Those two new indicators could signal a stronger-than-expected jobs report on Friday., Here's where things really get weird. If the jobs report were to come in really strong, say, 250,000 jobs, it might discourage policymakers at the Federal Reserve from doing more to stimulate growth. Many stock investors would be disappointed if Fed officials were to take stimulus off the table. That disappointment could actually hurt the stock market., In any case, the Fed's intentions will be revealed when policymakers hold a meeting Tuesday and Wednesday to vote on what to do next. And back in Europe, a German court is expected to issue a key ruling on the constitutionality of debt-bailout actions., With such big uncertainties hanging above, some Wall Street analysts say they would not be surprised if the stock market would see a downward correction of as much as 10 percent in coming weeks., Those very gloomy predictions may be colored by September's bad reputation. Analysts refer to the September effect, noting that over the past four decades, September has come in as the worst month for stock performance., It was especially bad in the presidential election cycle of 2008. The Dow took some terrifying drops that September, ending the month down 6 percent. That October was brutal too as the global financial crisis deepened., But Nariman Behravesh, chief economist for IHS Global Insight, a forecasting firm, said that September isn't always a tough month. In fact, in September 2010, the stock market shot up., Assuming Europe can indeed avoid an implosion, this autumn may actually turn out to be a balmy period, at least in terms of the economy. Profits are still decent and a lot of companies are making good money, Behravesh said. The United States is still a safe haven.
Ahead of Oktoberfest, Munich's brewers say they're running short of bottles and kegs for the festival's beer. Here, glass beer steins are seen at last year's Oktoberfest., Ahead of Oktoberfest, Munich's brewers say they're running short of bottles and kegs for the festival's beer. Here, glass beer steins are seen at last year's Oktoberfest., German beer drinkers are eagerly awaiting Sept. 22, when the first Oktoberfest beer barrel will be tapped in Munich and two weeks of revelry begin. But when that happens, they might want to drink up because the city's brewers are worried they won't be able to supply enough beer for the massive party and its huge beer tents., The brewers aren't out of beer there's plenty of that to go around, they say. The trouble is that makers of beers like Paulaner and Hacker-Pschorr don't have enough bottles to supply the festival. In some cases, they've fallen tens of thousands of bottles behind their production schedule. Other say their kegs are in short supply., The situation led Heiner Mueller of the Paulaner and Hacker-Pschorr brewery to appear in Munich's TZ newspaper today., Dear Munichers bring back your crates, he said, according to the German news site The Local. We need our empties!, The reason for the shortage is simple: People have been drinking a lot of beer in Munich lately. The spike in consumption is being blamed on some really nice weather the city's been having at the end of summer., As we reported in 2011, 7.5 million liters of beer were served at Munich's Oktoberfest last year. And of course, much of it is consumed in the festival's famous steins, the large mugs that hold draft beer., Because the brewers wash and reuse their bottles over and over as many as 50 times, according to TZ they rely on their customers to turn them back in. That hasn't been happening quickly enough to let beer-makers build up the supplies they need., We're tens of thousands of bottles short, said Stefan Hempl of the Hofbrau brewery., The Local describes what, for some, would be a nightmare scenario:, The crisis has led to Hofbrau prioritizing its two most popular beers Helles and Wiesnbier. 'At the moment we could have a situation where we don't have any dark beer for a few days,' said Hempl, sending a chill down many Bavarian spines., Even the big boys like Spaten and Lowenbrau both of them owned by Anheuser-Busch InBev are feeling the squeeze. Those breweries say they're running out of kegs., We can still fulfill all the orders, but it's getting tight, said Anheuser-Busch InBev's Oliver Bartelt.
The scene at a job fair in Harlem earlier this summer., The scene at a job fair in Harlem earlier this summer., Three bits of good news about jobs were just released., Private-sector employment increased by 201,000 from July to August on a seasonally adjusted basis, according to the latest ADP National Employment Report., And ADP revised up its estimate of the job growth in July to 173,000 from the 163,000 it previously reported., The August increase of 201,000, following a solid gain in July, supports the notion that the underlying trend in hiring has picked back up after slowing sharply during the spring, Joel Prakken, economist and chairman of Macroeconomic Advisers, says in the ADP report., Also this morning, the outplacement firm Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas reported that the number of layoffs announced by U.S. employers hit a 20-month low in August. It said that companies announced plans to shed 32,239 workers from their payrolls in August ... the fewest number of monthly job cuts by US-based firms since December 2010, when layoffs totaled 32,004., The firm cautioned against reading too much into the trend (layoffs have eased in recent months): The three-month decline in the pace of downsizing may be further evidence of an improving economy or it may simply be a summer lull in jobcut activity., Finally, the Employment and Training Administration just said that there were 365,000 first-time claims filed for jobless benefits last week, down from 377,000 the week before., We'll hear much more about August's job growth and unemployment on Friday when the Bureau of Labor Statistics issues its data about the month. It's first swipe at July's figures put the unemployment rate at 8.3 percent and the number of jobs added to payrolls at 163,000., While the ADP report and the BLS report have in recent months tended to generally agree on the job market trends, they don't necessarily track each other closely on the specifics. Bloomberg News says the median forecast of economist it has surveyed indicates BLS will report Friday that payrolls rose by 127,000 in August and the jobless rate stayed at 8.3 percent., Prakken, though, says in the ADP report that the gain in jobs it detected is strong enough to suggest that the national unemployment rate may have declined.
The European Central Bank refrained from cutting interest rates today as President Mario Draghi prepares to unveil a bond-purchase plan to save the euro, Bloomberg News writes. It adds that:, Draghi pledged more than a month ago to do what's needed to preserve the single currency. Now he's under pressure to follow through with details of a bond-purchase plan to lower borrowing costs in Spain and Italy and prevent a breakup of Europe's monetary union. Expectations have built to such an extent that Draghi risks losing credibility unless he delivers, economists and investors said., According to The Wall Street Journal, officials meeting Thursday will weigh a plan to purchase government bonds with maturities up to around three years, people familiar with the matter said, with a possibility they could extend slightly longer. The proposal wouldn't place limits on the amount of bonds purchased, the people said, giving the ECB maximum flexibility to stabilize financial markets., NPR's Jim Zarroli adds that in recent weeks Draghi has dropped hints that he may back a round of long-term bond purchases from countries such as Italy and Spain. Such a move would help lower the borrowing costs for the countries and stabilize the precarious financial conditions they face., Update at 8:50 a.m. ET. Bond-Buying Plan Announced:, The Wall Street Journal, which is live blogginga news conference Draghi is holding in Frankfurt, has posted the ECB president's statement about the central bank's bond-buying plan. He's calling the purchases Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs) and says they will help safeguard the monetary policy transmission mechanism in all countries of the euro area. In other words, they will help shore up the euro and keep its countries together., The Financial Times is also live blogging, and writes that Draghi said the bank will be buying bonds with maturities between one and three years. It also notes that the euro does NOT like this. Sliding now to a loss on the day., And with tongue firmly in cheek, the FT posts this:, Draghi says there was one dissenting view on the board. He won't say who that was. We couldn't possiIT WAS THE GERMANSbly guess., Our friends at Planet Money are planning to have more on all this.
Medical cannabis patient Michael Oliveri smokes marijuana during a news conference in Universal City, Calif., last week. Medical marijuana advocates say they have enough signatures to place a referendum before voters that would overturn a ban on pot clinics in Los Angeles., Medical cannabis patient Michael Oliveri smokes marijuana during a news conference in Universal City, Calif., last week. Medical marijuana advocates say they have enough signatures to place a referendum before voters that would overturn a ban on pot clinics in Los Angeles., Thursday was supposed to mark the end of medical marijuana dispensaries in Los Angeles, after the city council approved a ban on them this summer. But patients and advocates have managed to halt the ban, and some dispensary operators are suing the city., For years, Los Angeles has been a mecca for medical marijuana dispensaries. Anyone with a doctor's recommendation could stop in at chic storefronts offering cannabis-laced desserts or at the more underground clinics, labeled only with a green cross. Hundreds, maybe 1,000 of these pot shops popped up around L.A., City officials tried to get a handle on the proliferation, with endless meetings, community hearings, police raids and lawsuits. Finally, the council decided enough is enough, says City Councilman Jose Huizar, who wrote a bill outlawing all dispensaries. The council overwhelmingly passed the ban in July., It was getting way out of control, Huizar says. A thousand dispensaries? Some neighborhoods have two per block, and young people have access. They go around the corner, they smoke it. Crime increases around these dispensaries, the traffic, the robberies., Huizar's bill didn't outlaw medical marijuana, but it did call for a so-called gentle ban, which would allow only three or fewer patients or their caregivers to grow their own., At one pot clinic in L.A.'s Franklin Heights neighborhood, Egyptian meditation music mingles with the scents of indica, sativa and hybrid marijuana strains. Sitting in the front office is Marc O'Hara, the executive director of Patient Care Alliance Los Angeles. He scoffs at the idea that a gentle ban would provide access to medical marijuana., It's inconceivable to think that three homebound patients suffering from spasticity, cancer, autism could somehow pull together the wherewithal to produce medicine with the potency and the medicinal effect of what's grown by the best cultivators on the planet, O'Hara says., His group is suing the city over its handling of medical marijuana clinics. His colleague Tiffany Wright, who says she's a cannabis patient, says the city's ban would drive legitimate users underground., I feel like we're almost being forced back into the dark ages, she says. Nobody that I know who's a card-carrying patient wants to get their medicine from some suspect in a dark alley, that could potentially be contaminated with mold and pesticides, with no knowledge of who grew it or where it's been grown., Facing an outright ban on medical marijuana shops, activists, dispensary operators and the union representing pot shop workers started a campaign, collecting tens of thousands of signatures calling for a ballot measure repealing the ban., Activist Don Duncan, who heads the California chapter of Americans for Safe Access, says they had no choice because the city's policies have never been clear. Until now, he says, police have raided clinics at random and the city council has floundered with various policies., I look back and shake my head and think, 'What in the world has been going on in this city since 2005?' Duncan says., We're not saying no regulation, just a free for all nor are we saying we'll ban it outright. We're going to present the people of Los Angeles with a reasonable middle, he says., If the city clerk verifies that the signatures activists collected are valid, Angelenos will vote on the referendum in March. Meanwhile, L.A.'s ban is officially on hold. The state Supreme Court has yet to decide whether cities can shut down clinics at all. And federal officials continue to crack down on marijuana enterprises of all kinds in California, all of which are illegal under federal law.
David Sole rode a bus from Detroit to the Democratic National Convention in Charlotte, N.C., to protest how the Obama administration and the nation's banks have handled the foreclosure crisis., David Sole rode a bus from Detroit to the Democratic National Convention in Charlotte, N.C., to protest how the Obama administration and the nation's banks have handled the foreclosure crisis., Charlotte, N.C., host of the 2012 Democratic National Convention, is the nation's biggest financial center outside of New York. But Charlotte and surrounding Mecklenburg County have the highest foreclosure rates in the state, and many thousands of homeowners owe more on their homes than the properties are worth., As thousands of Democrats converge in Charlotte for the convention, some troubled homeowners have also gathered, lamenting that the foreclosure crisis has not been sufficiently front and center in the presidential campaign., Mike Shane and 40 other homeowners bused down from Detroit Sunday to protest in the long shadow of the towering Bank of America headquarters in Charlotte., My neighborhood is devastated by foreclosures, Shane says. I live on a block that, at one time, seven out of 19 houses were in foreclosure., Shane and others from the Moratorium NOW! Coalition want Obama to use his powers to halt foreclosures., I'm underwater, Shane says. I owe $120,000, and houses one or two houses [away] from me are selling now for [$10,000] to $20,000., 'Disgusted With Both Parties', Shane, an engineer for an automaker, says his beloved city of Detroit has gone to waste as housing prices have fallen and people have lost their jobs. With the presidential candidates more or less mum on the subject, he says, he's still searching for someone to vote for., &ldquo; I'm actually quite disgusted with both parties. I think they're captive of the big banks and the financial interests of this country., - Mike Shane, a Detroit homeowner who traveled to Charlotte, N.C., to protest the handling of the foreclosure crisis, I'm actually quite disgusted with both parties, Shane says. I think they're captive of the big banks and the financial interests of this country., Shane is current on his mortgage. But a few miles from the protests downtown, Charlotte resident Jessica Sanchez and her family face worse circumstances., Jessica has spina bifida and other medical problems that keep her in a wheelchair. When her parents bought their house a dozen years ago, they customized it with a ramp, new doors and other changes to meet Jessica's needs., But now, they may have to leave the home. The family fell behind on the mortgage paying her medical bills, and now the bank is preparing to foreclose. For the past year, Jessica's Spanish-speaking parents have relied on her English translations to help fight to keep the house., My mom and dad are trying to fight with the bank, Jessica says. They're trying to take it away because we owe $20,000. They want $20,000 by Sept. 14., The family is hosting a barbecue to raise money and awareness. So far, they've raised just over $400 selling food and washing cars., And at 17, Jessica has become a teen expert conversant in the family's mortgage and personal finances., We pay the house, or we pay my medical bills and my medicine, she says. Or we buy food, because we can't do everything at the same time., To Jessica, Washington, D.C., is a city she once visited for a fifth-grade school trip. She fondly recalls Ford's Theatre and the Lincoln Memorial. But Jessica does not consider Washington the place where she will find solutions to her family's dire housing situation., Everybody in the United States should be living in a home, under a roof, she says, fighting tears. Not on the roads, asking for money., As November Approaches, Votes On The Line, Outside on the porch, fellow Charlotte resident David Johnson is here in solidarity with the Sanchez family. Johnson is one of 14 million homeowners across the country who are underwater. He's had sporadic work since losing his construction job two years ago, and eventually, he could no longer afford his home loan. But the bank would only modify it, he says, if he fell behind on payments. So he did, but the new payments were still too high., Now, Johnson and his family stand to lose their home in November just after the presidential election., The Obama administration didn't do what they needed to do, Johnson says. They put programs together and they put them out there. They just didn't put enough controls on it where it made a difference in my personal situation. So yes, that will affect my vote in November, for sure., Even so, Johnson says, it's not as though Republican candidate Mitt Romney is discussing housing, either., I don't hear it talked about nearly enough, Johnson says., He says he recently found construction work, but even that is bittersweet., The only thing that's getting funded to be built is apartment houses, he says. You know why that is? It's for all the people that are getting foreclosed on, and that's a shame.
David Leonhardt, the Washington bureau chief of The New York Times, won a Pulitzer Prize last year for his columns about the economy., David Leonhardt, the Washington bureau chief of The New York Times, won a Pulitzer Prize last year for his columns about the economy., On Monday, Republican vice presidential candidate Paul Ryan told a campaign rally audience in North Carolina that the president can say a lot of things, but he can't tell you you are better off. Later that day in Detroit, Vice President Joe Biden responded America is better off today than they left us., New York Times Washington bureau chief David Leonhardt argues that both Ryan and Biden are right: It's partly semantics., The country itself is better off, Leonhardt tells Fresh Air's Terry Gross. The economy has stabilized since the recession in 2008, which was a little bit worse than 1929, he says. And yet, of course, we don't have anything that looks like the Great Depression. As bad as the economy is, we don't have unemployment at 20 percent., But, Leonhardt says, when looking at measures such as household income and median wealth, a typical American household is worse off than it was four years ago., Financial crises inflict their damage over many months and then there are long, slow, disappointing recoveries, he says., Ultimately, it is difficult to evaluate Ryan's and Biden's assertions, Leonhardt says, because the Republicans might have acted differently from the Democrats in the wake of the recession., In comparing the economic plans of President Obama and Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney, Leonhardt says President Obama wants to raise tax rates only for households making more than $250,000 a year, while Romney wants to implement a 20-percent tax cut in everyone's rate., The latter would mean, in dollar terms, a much larger tax cut for people who make a lot of money, he says., Obama has lost the ability to implement his tax agenda with a Republican-led House, Leonhardt says. On the flip-side, Romney promises too much., What he says is that he'll cut tax rates, he won't add to the deficit, and he won't, in any way, add to the tax burden of the middle class, Leonhardt says. And when independent economists have looked at it, they've said, 'He cannot do all those things mathematically.' , Leonhardt says the election matters because it determines whether all kinds of things that have passed into law actually go into effect, including health insurance reform, financial regulation and clean energy policy., Leonhardt won a Pulitzer Prize last year for his columns on the economy., On how Republicans and Democrats differ on taxes, Where the Republicans stand on taxes is that they've promised a big across-the-board tax cut 20 percent in everyone's rate, which would mean in dollar terms a much larger tax cut for people who make a lot of money. They pay more taxes in part because they make a lot more money. Romney has then said, though, that this isn't going to add to the deficit at all, which is another way of saying, 'It's not going to be a tax cut.' So he has promised that every tax cut he gives people, he's going to take away by closing deductions., Now, economists really like this idea because it simplifies the tax code. It means rather than spending a lot of time trying to figure out what deductions and credits you qualify for, you can just go about your business., The problem is that Romney has not identified any of the tax breaks he would close. And while we can all say we're in favor of simplifying the tax code, you start to lose people when you say you're going to take away their mortgage deduction or take away their tax exclusion for health insurance or the tax break for saving for retirement. And so there's a lot of skepticism about whether he's actually going to be able to do that., What he says is that he'll cut tax rates, he won't add to the deficit, and he won't in any way add to the tax burden of the middle class. And when independent economists have looked at it, they've said, he cannot do all those things mathematically. ..., What President Obama says he wants to do is he wants to keep tax rates where they are for everybody making less than $250,000. For people making more than $250,000 he wants to go back to the rates under Bill Clinton, rather than the rates under George W. Bush, which is to say he wants to raise taxes on every household making more than $250,000 a year by a few percentage points., The big uncertainty here is whether he can actually do that. It's not clear how tough Democrats are willing to be about that. When Democrats controlled the Senate, the House and the White House with President Obama, they had two years really in which they could have done that and they didn't. They were worried about putting in place any kind of tax cut during a terribly deep recession. They were worried about being cast as tax raisers by the Republicans heading into the midterm elections. And then once they lost the House, they lost the ability to do that., And so, if President Obama wins re-election, we're going to end up in this fairly incredible situation in which starting Jan. 1 for a whole host of reasons ... tax rates are going to go up on everyone. All the Bush tax cuts expire, not just on the top end, and Obama will be saying, 'Let's extend them all except on the very top,' and Republicans will be saying, 'Let's extend them all.' But if they can't come to a deal, taxes go up on everyone. The Congressional Budget Office says it would be such a big tax increase and the economy is so vulnerable, that it would send us back into recession. It's going to be a game of chicken. And it's going to be fascinating to see who swerves off the road first., On how Republicans and Democrats differ on Medicare, The budget deficit is overwhelmingly about Medicare. It's overwhelmingly about the fact that most Americans will pay much less in Medicare taxes than they will get in Medicare benefits even though people don't always realize that. They think they pay for their Medicare, but the typical person does not come close to doing so. So neither party has a plan to get it into balance., But both parties have a plan that if you think about it philosophically would make a difference, would reduce the long-term Medicare deficit. And so we don't have to get too precise and say, 'Well, neither of them has a plan that works and thus, neither one of them has a plan that is meaningful at all.' They do each have meaningful plans., The Democrats' plan is to make much less of a change to Medicare than Republicans would. It is to say, through a variety of ways, we want to reduce the growth rate of Medicare spending. We want to say, if there is scientific evidence that suggests that this expensive new treatment doesn't actually make you healthier, well, over the long term Medicare may not reimburse for that treatment, as much as it would for a treatment that there is scientific evidence. You could still get it, but you'd have to pay for it. It takes baby steps in that direction. Many health experts wish it would go further, but when you think about the whole debate over death panels, you realize why this is tricky terrain. ..., In a sense, they try to take Medicare and they try to say, we're going to make it more efficient. We're going to have it so the government is not so often paying for health care that doesn't make people healthier. And the government needs to make those decisions because Medicare is a government program., The [Republicans] say, 'No, no, no.' The whole thing, to some extent, is broken and what we need to do is turn it over to the private market. And competition will take care of this problem. And so the government will give you a chunk of money. You can go out; you can buy your own plan. And by competing for your business, the plans will get rid of those inefficiencies in Medicare. The Republicans have backed off a little bit from some of that., In the original Paul Ryan plan, you had to move to that if you were 55 and under everyone 55 and older got to remain in Medicare. In the new plan, it's sort of an option. But I don't think there's any doubt that philosophically that's what the Republicans want to move more toward. And you can make an argument that it will make a big difference. There's always some reason to doubt that it would because historically, the record of market competition working in health care is very mixed. It's worked for things like laser surgery. It hasn't worked so well for things like heart surgery or cancer care., On the question: Are you better off now than you were four years ago?, Paul Ryan said the people are not better off. And Joe Biden said America is better off. I actually think you can make a really good argument that they're both right. And here's what that argument would look like. The country itself is better off. Four years ago, September 2008, we were just about to enter a horrific downturn. The collapse of Lehman Brothers set off the worst of it. If you look at something like world trade, stock prices, industrial production worldwide an economist named Barry Eichengreen with colleagues have done some of this work it is remarkable how similar 2008 looks like 1929 in terms of the speed of the declines, in almost any global economic indicator of import that you look at. In most of the ways, 2008 was a little bit worse than 1929. And yet, of course, we don't have anything that looks like the Great Depression. As bad as the economy is, we don't have unemployment at 20 percent. When you look at those measures, what you see is in 2009, the economy really stabilized. It's remarkable to look at those lines continue to fall back in 20s and 30s, and sort of flatten out in 2008 and 2009. The Obama administration can claim a lot of credit for that. They broke the back of this, along with the [Federal] Reserve, and by the way, with an assist from the outgoing Bush administration, which was quite aggressive in its final months. And so is the country better off today or when it is was in the very early stages of this really frightening crisis? I don't think there's any question that we're better off today as a country than we were then. ..., But, there is also a very serious argument that a typical American household is worse off than it was four years ago and that's because financial crises don't do all their damage at once. They do it over many months and then there are long, slow disappointing, painful recoveries. And I think one of the fairest indictments of the Obama administration is that it has consistently underestimated the severity of this crisis. It didn't in 2009, but since then it has. It thought the recovery would be better than it really was. And the same goes for the Federal Reserve. And so most of the reason why we're not better off is just that's the way financial crises work. But some portion of it is that the policy makers, The Fed and Obama administration looked on the bright side a little bit too often. And didn't take every step they could have taken. And so when you look at something like household income, when you look at median wealth, when you look at the percentage of the population that's working on all of those measures we are lower than we were four years ago. And so I think it's fair to say the typical American household isn't better off, but the country is.
The General Motors logo is displayed atop the Renaissance Center in Detroit. The automaker, while doing much better following the government bailout, is still lagging some of its competitors., The General Motors logo is displayed atop the Renaissance Center in Detroit. The automaker, while doing much better following the government bailout, is still lagging some of its competitors., When you talk to car people about General Motors, they all say the company has gotten better., I think General Motors, productwise, is in a better position than it's been in a decade or so, says Jack Nerad of Kelley Blue Book. The new products, we feel ... are all quite good., Like many people, however, Nerad adds an important caveat. He says GM's improvement doesn't mean the company is completely out of the woods, because the competition is very good as well., While GM has been getting better, so have almost all other car companies foreign and domestic. Nerad says players in this new car world need to be more than just good., They have to be No. 1 on the shopping list, he says, because a person is only going to buy one car. They're not going to buy an array of cars., Nerad says it's not enough to be competitive; a car company has to have that vehicle that's going to put it across the top a blockbuster. Toyota has the Camry; Honda has the Civic and Accord; Ford has the Fusion. Those are all top-selling cars., One reason those cars have been able to stay on top is that they are constantly being updated and changed. GM is trying to break into that territory with its new Chevy Malibu, which has been revamped but was delayed in coming out in part because of the company's bankruptcy in 2009. (It emerged from bankruptcy shortly afterward.), David Zenlea, assistant editor at Automobile Magazine, says the new Malibu is a perfectly good car for a year-and-a-half ago., Critics say GM's new Chevy Malibu is a fine car, but it's not as innovative as it needs to be to be a blockbuster., Critics say GM's new Chevy Malibu is a fine car, but it's not as innovative as it needs to be to be a blockbuster., When you release a new midsize car, where you want to be is you want to leap to the front of the pack, and then somebody else leapfrogs past you again in six months, Zenlea says. You want to have that brief window where you're the absolute latest and greatest and best., The Malibu is a very good car, Zenlea says, but when he drove it he didn't feel it set the bar a notch higher., GM is trying to play catch-up and is revamping more than 70 percent of its cars and trucks in the next two years., GM spokesman Randy Arickx says bankruptcy helped the company get control of its costs and made it easier to turn a profit, but being strapped for cash made it hard for GM to come up with new ideas., As we walked through bankruptcy, we actually had to reduce some of our capital spending, Arickx says. So the number of products that we've been able to bring to the marketplace has been less than the industry average., Arickx acknowledges that GM has been challenged in coming up with enough new cars and trucks., Internationally, the company faces trouble in Europe, where it lost $400 million last quarter. GM has also lost some of the ground it gained from companies such as Toyota and Honda, which are now essentially fully recovered from the effects of the March 2011 Japanese earthquake and tsunami., When you ask GM executives such as Arickx about the company's health, however, they point to two all-important numbers: $33 billion in cash and $5 billion in debt., Last month, Fitch, the ratings agency, upgraded GM's investment status one notch and said the company has a stable outlook. But that doesn't take into account the one-third of the company that the government still owns., GM's share price is down after its 2009 initial public offering, so if the government were to divest itself of its stake in the company, the government would lose as much as $16 billion., This all leaves one question to be asked about GM: When is it fair to really sound the alarm?, Automobile Magazine's Zenlea says he thinks people are sounding the alarm a bit too soon. He says the real hurdle for GM is not its balance sheet but its cars., The real question if you want to judge post-bankruptcy General Motors is going to be to look at [its] products a year or two ... down the road and see how ... [it] really invest[s] and develop[s] ... products, Zenlea says. I think that's where we'll really get to see what they're made of., The next chance to see what it's made of is in 2013. That's when the Chevy Impala goes on sale just one of many tests for GM.
The Social Security tax rate is scheduled to revert to 6.2 percent next year, up from the temporary reduction to 4.2 percent on an employee's first $110,000 in wages which has been in effect since January 2011., The Social Security tax rate is scheduled to revert to 6.2 percent next year, up from the temporary reduction to 4.2 percent on an employee's first $110,000 in wages which has been in effect since January 2011., An occasional series, Fiscal Cliff Notes breaks down the looming fiscal cliff of expiring tax cuts and deep automatic spending cuts set to hit around the first of year., If you work, you've probably been getting this tax break: Since January 2011, the government has knocked 2 percentage points off the payroll tax., For someone making $50,000 a year, the payroll tax holiday works out to about $20 a week., We definitely notice it, says Steve Warner of Winter Haven, Fla., while on vacation with his family recently in the nation's capital., Most of what we use that for [is] just our day-to-day bills that we have. I mean, it's not like we put it away in savings or anything. It's just more money that we can actually use for gas, food and certain things like that., That's exactly what Congress and the president had in mind when they created the holiday. But it ultimately didn't have the effect many economists had hoped for, because two years in a row, in the spring, gas prices spiked and ate up a lot of that extra spending money., It didn't really help support stronger growth, but it certainly helped the economy, says Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody's Analytics. Without it we'd be in a measurably worse place., But even as the economy appears to still be in a rut, there's little appetite to extend the tax holiday with its $95 billion price tag one more time, says Zandi., A year ago, Zandi was among those pushing for an extension. Now he says it's time to let it expire on Dec. 31. And unless something changes, it will., Caitlin Morgan, a mother of four boys from Eugene, Ore., says for her family, the extra money was plowed into food and other living expenses. But she seems to accept that the holiday may well be over at the end of the year., [The] government needs to prop itself up, she says. We need to get out of this debt. So you know, if we need to cut a few corners for that to happen, then that's OK. I'm OK with that.
A Dodge Ram pickup on sale at Criswell Chrysler Jeep Dodge in Gaithersburg, Md., A Dodge Ram pickup on sale at Criswell Chrysler Jeep Dodge in Gaithersburg, Md., All three Detroit automakers saw double-digit sales increases in August compared with the same month last year, the Detroit Free Press writes. The gains show that the automotive industry remains one of the economy's few bright spots, it adds., As the Los Angeles Times puts it, consumers bought cars at a steady pace in August as the automobile industry continued to help anchor the U.S. economy., Chrysler said it sales rose 14 percent, on strong demand for Ram pickup trucks, The Associated Press reports., General Motors Co. sales jumped 10 percent, about double expectations, and Ford Motor Co. sales were up 13 percent, about 3 percentage points higher than anticipated, the Detroit News says. It adds that Fiat's 34 percent increase was the largest sales gain of any Chrysler brand, and August marked Chrysler Group's 29th consecutive month of year-over-year sales gains.
A late-summer horror tale took possession of the weekend box office, as Hollywood quietly wound down a busy season that turned out to be not so busy., The Possession debuted as the No. 1 movie with $21.3 million over the four-day Labor Day weekend, according to studio estimates. The Lionsgate fright flick stars Kyra Sedgwick and Jeffrey Dean Morgan as parents of a girl possessed by a demon., Opening in second-place with $13 million was the Weinstein Co. bootlegging drama Lawless, with Shia LaBeouf and Guy Pearce in a story of moonshiners pursued by a corrupt lawman during Prohibition., It was a typically slow Labor Day weekend, ending a summer that failed to live up to Hollywood's expectations., Studio executives started the season with projections of record business. But revenues dropped 3 percent compared to summer 2011, while attendance was at its lowest in at least 20 years, according to box-office tracker Hollywood.com., Labor Day weekend revenues totaled $134 million, down 3.4 percent from last year's holiday, when The Help led with $19.9 million., Hollywood.com analyst Paul Dergarabedian said overall domestic revenues for the summer season, from the first weekend in May through Labor Day, came in at $4.275 billion, down from a record $4.4 billion in summer 2011., The attendance picture was even worse, after factoring in this year's higher ticket prices. The number of movie tickets sold this summer was about 533 million, down 4 percent from 2011. That figure is the lowest since Dergarabedian began compiling summer figures 20 years ago., We talk about summer being product-driven, and it's all about the movies, Dergarabedian said. While it started off on a really high note, as summer went on, it seemed like the moviegoers were less and less interested in the movies being released., Back in May, when the superhero sensation The Avengers launched the season with a record $207.4 million weekend, Hollywood insiders predicted their best summer ever, as a lineup of huge titles was set to hit theaters week after week., While The Avengers and superhero films The Dark Knight Rises and The Amazing Spider-Man led the season, and movies such as Ted and Brave topped the $200 million mark, many other movies fell flat., Big stars delivered big busts, with Adam Sandler's That's My Boy and Johnny Depp's Dark Shadows. Action movies such as Battleship and Total Recall also flopped., There were some smaller surprise successes, including the anti-Barack Obama documentary 2016: Obama's America, which expanded into broader nationwide release and came in at No. 8 on Labor Day weekend, with $7.1 million. That raised its total to $20.3 million since the documentary opened in a handful of theaters in mid-July., The weekend's other new wide release, the family flick The Oogieloves in the Big Balloon Adventure, flopped with just $601,545, averaging a tiny $278 a screen in 2,160 theaters one of the poorest openings in recent box office history. By comparison, The Possession averaged $7,564 in 2,816 cinemas., Most scary movies draw their biggest crowd on opening-day Friday, as horror fans turn out for the debut; business then often drops off on Saturday. The Possession bucked that pattern as the audience grew larger on Saturday, then held up solidly through Sunday and Monday., Horror films normally don't do that, said Richie Fay, head of distribution for Lionsgate. If you play to that audience and that audience is satisfied, they talk about it and they come back on Saturday, or their friends come back with them on Saturday., Warner Bros. just opened The Dark Knight Rises in China and Italy, lifting the Batman blockbuster back to the No. 1 spot internationally with $46.4 million and raising its overseas total to $575 million., The Dark Knight Rises took in an additional $7.9 million domestically over Labor Day weekend, pushing its domestic haul to $433.2 million. The film joined 2008's The Dark Knight as a $1 billion worldwide hit, with its total now at a few million dollars more than its predecessor's.
Graduates attend a ceremony at the University of Alabama in Tuscaloosa. Writer Joel Kotkin notes that many recent college grads are saddled with high debt and dim job prospects., U.S. student loan debt tops $1 trillion, and young people face disproportionately high unemployment. Writer Joel Kotkin points to these numbers when he claims today's millennial generation is getting the short end of the stick. Kotkin speaks with Tell Me More host Michel Martin about his Newsweek/Daily Beast article on what he calls the screwed generation., Recent college graduates are growing up in a terrible economy that's generating very few jobs. So, they're stepping in it, if you will, economically, Kotkin tells Martin. And, he says, they're going to inherit an enormous debt run up by the federal, state and local governments that they are going to have to pay for., On top of that, Kotkin says, they face a high amount of college loan debt they can't afford because baby boomers are staying in their jobs longer, creating a tight labor market. And, of course, the problem is that they racked up that debt, and they can't pay it because they can't get a decent job. So that's a pretty good definition of being screwed, he says., Kotkin says one of the reasons millennials are in this situation is the push for a college degree, which in earlier generations led to a better job., In my parents' generation, the sort of World War II/Depression generation, if you got a college degree you were pretty guaranteed of a decent job because there weren't that many people with BAs, he says. There was a huge growth in the number of jobs that needed these skills, and a relative paucity [of people to fill them]. Now the BA has become a commodity there are so many of them., And then, I think, there are also many young people who have been pushed into four-year schools where they would have been better off with technical training or a two-year degree, or going out and getting a job. And now they're stuck with debt.
Vernissage is trying to revamp boxed wine to attract a more sophisticated customer., Vernissage is trying to revamp boxed wine to attract a more sophisticated customer., Ladies, if the thought of showing up at a party or a picnic with a box of wine seems a little gauche, there's now a product for you: Vernissage's bag-in-a-bag of wine. It's boxed wine, shaped like a handbag., Elliot Stern, CEO of Squish Wines, is in charge of importing the bags, which originate in Sweden, into the U.S. He says it's a whole new concept of design meant to appeal to a classy lady heading out to lunch with the girls or dinner with her significant other., More than half of female drinkers chose wine over other alcoholic beverages, according to a recent Gallup poll, so there's reason to think this might appeal to a few women out there., The idea for the wine purse originated a few years back in Sweden. Alternative wine packaging has been surging across Scandinavia, and luxury wine expert Takis Soldatos took notice, Stern says. Soldatos then paired up with the bag designer, Sofia Bloomberg, and came up with the Vernissage brand. Since its Swedish debut in 2010, the wine-in-a-purse has launched in China, Japan and several other countries in Europe., Stores in the U.S. will start seeing these bags of wine in the next few weeks. But since wine consumption continues to steadily climb, what took the purse so long to make its voyage here?, The answer may lie within the stigma of boxed wine, which suffers a reputation for being cheap and generally lousy. Plus, a box can't really compete visually with a sleek glass bottle., And yet there's a silver lining to all the cardboard and plastic: Bags seem to actually be better than glass for preserving wine. When a glass bottle is uncorked, air rushes in and starts to oxidize the wine, and distort the flavor. The bag-in-box technology forces the wine out of the tap while only allowing in a minimal amount of oxygen. Hence, it keeps longer even up to a few weeks., Oenophiles should be happy to know that Vernissage is pumping French wine from Vin de Pays d'Oc into its airtight bags. There's a Chardonnay Viognier (in a white bag), a Cabernet Shiraz (black), and a Rose (pink, of course). A 1.5-liter purse will run customers about $20. The 3-liter bag will cost about $40., As for how well the purse will do stateside, only time will tell, but success on other continents bodes a promising future. People do accept change eventually., One generation ago no one was buying wine with a screw cap, Stern says, and look now., Good point, Mr. Stern., Only thing we're wondering is if there's a man bag version of this in the works.
A view of the skyline of Charlotte, N.C., on Sunday. Preparations for the Democratic National Convention are under way around Charlotte, where the party is expected to nominate President Obama to run for a second term., Delegates, journalists and protesters are beginning to fill the streets of Charlotte, N.C. The city has a lot riding on the Democratic National Convention, which gets under way Tuesday., Hundreds of protesters paraded around the downtown area of Charlotte which residents call Uptown gathering in front of Bank of America headquarters., We are here today to protest against these criminals, these criminal bankers, who are responsible for the eviction of millions of people from their homes throughout the United States of America, said one unidentified protester with a megaphone., The city has been preparing for the convention and the protests for months, taking extraordinary security measures., There's no denying that this represents a singular moment in the city's history, said Charlotte Mayor Anthony Foxx. It's also no secret that with that level of global exposure, and the very nature of this event, that the level of security is higher than any event we've hosted in our city before., The city passed an ordinance creating a 100-square block security zone in which almost anything might be banned: handbags, backpacks, water bottles, scarves even bike helmets are on the list of potential contraband., While local officials are anxious about security, local business owners are anxious about getting enough customers., We usually give cops half price, said James Bazzelle, who with his wife owns Mert's Heart and Soul, a soul food restaurant. I told them we're not doing that for all the cops this week they're so many of them., Bazzelle, who's owned his business for 14 years, worries that business from the convention won't live up to the hype., There's been a lot of anxiety, Bazzelle said. But like everybody I talk to, my vendors or my employees, everybody is saying the same thing: 'We'll get through it; we'll just roll with what we got.' , Bazzelle says he and other business owners wonder whether delegates and other visitors will actually have any time to stop and spend any money., But in one area of town, generators line the street, where an electrician has been hard at work., I got all my generators set out just waiting on the vendors to get here, said electrician Rick Eudy. , Eudy's been working 16 hour days, and he's not complaining., Any big event always brings money, he says. I'm sure that Charlotte will bring in some big money. A lot of visitors in town, a lot of dignitaries., Politics aside, Eudy says big money is exactly what Charlotte needs.
Anyone with a 401(k) retirement plan has been painfully aware of the gyrations in the stock market in recent years. The market has come back up lately, but the economy is still in low gear, so many analysts aren't too bullish in the short term. Also, treasuries and CDs are offering tiny returns., So what's the average American trying to save for retirement to do? Answers are percolating at an annual economics retreat in Maine., Every year in August, some of the nation's top economists, money managers and some Federal Reserve officials gather in the woods up near the Canadian border. They do some fly-fishing, they schmooze, and they talk shop about investing., This year, one of the topics of discussion is fees. The takeaway, especially these days, is that you want to avoid paying big ones., The 'Compounding Effect', John Mauldin, president of Millennium Wave Advisors in Dallas, says annual mutual fund fees of 1 percent or 2 percent might sound small. But consider the advisers' fee, which is also required every year. Those, Mauldin says, are a very big deal., The difference of 1 to 1.5 percent in commissions on an annual basis over 30 years is the difference between $1 million and $2 million at the end of the time period, he says., In other words, paying too much in fees is the difference between retiring with half a million or $1 million., It's a huge compounding effect. It only seems like a small amount today, but it compounds over time, Mauldin says. I think Einstein said that compound interest is the eighth wonder of the world., Keeping Down Costs, Some people here think there may be a ninth wonder of the world at least for people focused on investing. It's called an exchange-traded fund. These have come along in recent years, and a lot of people invest with them now, but many other people have no idea what an ETF is., It's a remarkable instrument. It has introduced democracy to investing, says David Kotok, the chief economist at Cumberland Advisors, a firm that advises individuals and big pension funds., Kotok says ETFs are like index funds they track whole sectors of market, such as the S&P; 500. But Kotok says ETFs can be traded more easily, like stocks can be traded. Also, you can target the energy sector, bonds, commodities and real estate just about anything. Kotok says ETFs can have even lower fees than index funds., I have some clients where we have five or six ETFs, and we meet their entire investment objective at very, very low cost, he says., Kotok is actually so excited about ETFs that he wrote book about them. It has a sample portfolio in it where the annual fees are just 0.12 percent, which is extremely low., Vanguard, an investment management company that offers a lot of ETFs, says you have to look at the fine print, though. Sometimes an ETF is cheaper, and sometimes an index fund is cheaper., Beating The Professionals, Either way, many people at the Maine retreat say ETFs or index funds are a better bet than actively managed mutual funds, where you pay money managers to pick stocks. Jim Bianco is president of Bianco Research, which has hundreds of big institutional clients., We did a study and found that last year was the worst year in the last 14 years for the average mutual fund as far as underperforming their benchmark, he says., Martin Barnes, chief economist at BCA Research, says that last year, 80 percent of the time, mutual fund managers who picked stocks and invested in big U.S. companies had returns that were worse than the index in the same sector. That means odds are you would have been better off in just a basic index fund., Who knows what the percentage of advisers is or brokers? I mean ... these are the sophisticated guys, Barnes says. We're talking about the guys at Wellington, the guys at Fidelity, the guys that are running the big money ... they can't beat the index., Also, some of the economists at the retreat say if you're going to hire an investment adviser, do it on a one-time-fee basis. In other words, pay them a couple-hundred bucks an hour or whatever is reasonable to meet or talk on the phone once or twice a year. Don't, economists recommend, hand them an annual percentage of your life savings for doing a few hours of work.
Mark Baker produces cured pork from a type of hybrid swine recently put on Michigan's invasive species list. Baker says complying with the state's new rules will end his business., Mark Baker produces cured pork from a type of hybrid swine recently put on Michigan's invasive species list. Baker says complying with the state's new rules will end his business., It's estimated that as many as 3,000 wild pigs are on the loose in Michigan. Nationwide, they cause more than $1.8 billion in damage to farms each year. So recently, the state's Department of Natural Resources put Russian boar on the state's invasive species list., Mark Baker left the military eight years ago to start Baker's Green Acres, a small farm in Marion, Mich., with his wife and kids. Since then, he's put a whole lot of love, money and time into developing tasty charcuterie: salted and cured pork, derived from his hybrids of Russian boar and the heritage breed Mangalitsa., My chefs love it, Baker says. They like the dark red meat, the woody flavor and the glistening fat., At the moment, Baker is the only farmer raising the swine for human consumption who freely admits he has them., But with Michigan's new order, Baker's herd was suddenly classified as an illegal invasive species putting him at risk of up to two years in jail and $20,000 in fines. If Baker complies, he will receive no compensation for the loss of his investment., That, he says, would finish his business. It's over at that point, he says. I'd be done., Ed Golder, public information officer for Michigan's DNR, says these invasive swine are nothing more than Asian carp with legs. They will come in and devastate a natural ecosystem, and they will pose a serious threat to farms of all sorts., Wild pig experts say Michigan officials have the right idea trying to cut the Russian boar population before it can spiral out of control. And the agency didn't mean for the order to reach into agriculture; in fact, it specifically states it isn't intended to harm the domestic pork industry in the state., According to the agency, there are two species of pigs: Sus scrofa, or Russian boar, which are the subject of the order; and Sus domestica domestic pigs, the source of most bacon and ham., In a ruling, the agency listed eight visual characteristics they argue are common to Russian boar and their hybrids. The wording indicates that a pig with just one of the listed characteristics could potentially be identified as a Russian boar or Russian boar hybrid., But critics, including Michigan state Sen. Joe Hune, say those guidelines are overly vague. If the tail is either curly or straight, you can be a felon for owning that hog, Hune says., A Russian sow on Mark Baker's farm. Four other parties have joined Baker's lawsuit against the Michigan Department of Natural Resources., A Russian sow on Mark Baker's farm. Four other parties have joined Baker's lawsuit against the Michigan Department of Natural Resources., Wildlife biologist Shannon Hanna, who is overseeing the agency's order, concedes that some of the characteristics in the ruling are similar to a domestic hog breed, like light-colored underfur and striped piglets. But, she says, it is highly unlikely that we would just pull one characteristic out of there., The agency's use of the word feral in the order has also further stoked the debate., How can the DNR say that the pigs that are under my control, livin' in my barns how can they say that they are feral? asks farmer Mark Baker., So Baker filed suit against the agency, and gathered his kids and some squirming Russian piglets to make his case in a YouTube video. Before it knew it, the DNR found itself in a massive food fight., But the DNR says it can't comment on Baker's charges because of his lawsuit, so Baker has the stage all to himself and now has about 100,000 hits on his video. Mike Adams, an Arizona-based conservative commentator, produced a podcast charging that the state of Michigan is now just days away from kicking in the doors of all these farmers, shooting the pigs, and then arresting all of these farmers as felons., I wish there was a way to have folks feel more comfortable with this, says Hanna, and know that we really are just looking at this Russian boar variety of swine, and not looking at the domestic breeds of swine that other folks have been worried about., Misinformation certainly hasn't helped. Dave Tuxbury, a rancher who raised Russian boar primarily for hunting facilities, had his boar and their piglets killed to comply with the state's order. But a misleading version of his story, reporting that Tuxbury was forced to kill his herd in an armed raid, was spread by both social and traditional media., DNR never conducted raids forcing farmers to kill their pigs on the spot, and has created a Web page to help combat misinformation. But, as the DNR's Shannon Hanna explains, those who raise the swine need to, by law, abate a public nuisance. These folks can shoot their own swine, they can harvest it, use it as they want, eat it, she says., Mark Baker contends he's fond of his swine, just as he's fond of his dogs. They can't force me to shoot an animal. I won't do it. I refuse to do it, he says., Baker also says he never expected people to get so riled up over the issue. But, as Michigan state Sen. Darwin Booher says, if you threaten my livelihood, you threaten feeding my family tonight eventually something is going to happen., The ultimate resolution to the debate may lie in court. Baker's lawsuit against the Michigan DNR has been joined with four other cases. The combined suit is just getting under way., Ultimately, if a judge rules in Baker's favor, the Invasive Species Order could be thrown out. As many states in the South have learned the hard way, the results could be devastating. But in a food fight where a state agency is pitted against slow-cooked specialty pork shoulder, you can guess who the fan favorite is.
A garbage truck at the Harrisburg, Pa., incinerator., Harrisburg, Pa., leads the nation in a dubious distinction: It has the most debt per capita of any U.S. city. The town's 50,000 citizens are on the hook for $1.5 billion., The bizarre tale behind the massive debt includes a do-gooder who skipped town, an epically mismanaged incinerator, and possible criminal behavior., I profiled the do-gooder, David Unkovic, earlier this year. He was appointed by the state of Pennsylvania to fix the Harrisburg debt problem. He seemed like the perfect guy for the job. Confident but not arrogant. Low key. Earnest. The occasional bow tie, and glasses., I asked Unkovic: Can you get this city out of debt?, I don't say 'I,' he said. I think a lot of people have to help get this city turned around. But yeah. I think it can happen., Unkovic seemed so calm when I talked to him. But a week later, he seemed to snap. Outside the local courthouse, he gave an edgy, impromptu press conference., The house of cards is coming down now, and they're all coming down at the same time, he said. A few days later, he scrawled a handwritten resignation letter, dropped it off downtown, and disappeared from public life., The man brought in to vanquish the city's debt was vanquished himself. What happened? I spent months calling and emailing before I finally made contact with Unkovic again., You can find him these days on a peaceful wilderness reserve outside Philadelphia, where he walks around a pond and thinks., There's probably not an hour that goes by since I've resigned that I'm not thinking about Harrisburg one way or the other, he says., He thinks a lot about the the Harrisburg incinerator a fire-breathing, money-burning dragon of debt that sunk the town., When the incinerator was first built, in 1969, Harrisburg officials hoped it would allow the city would collect fees from towns all over the state for burning their trash., But by the time Unkovic got to Harrisburg, the incinerator had accumulated $300 million worth of debt. And it had never, in four decades, really worked properly., When Unkovic first arrived in town, he thought it was just bad management. Now, he thinks it's something more sinister. I asked Unkovic: Was the financing of the incinerator criminal?, I don't know, he said. It bothers me as someone who's done financing for so many years to see something like that. Because it's the worst stuff you can look at., When I put that question to people back in Harrisburg, they didn't hesitate., Illegal conduct occurred, Bill Cluck, who serves on the board that runs Harrisburg's incinerator, told me. I think false statements were submitted under penalty of law to the state government in connection with the financing., Stephen Reed was the mayor of Harrisburg from 1980 to 2009. People in town famously say he never met a bond he didn't like. He used the money borrowed on the incinerator to do all sorts of things., He bought strange artifacts from all over the country, dreaming of building a Wild West museum. The city borrowed money to buy a baseball team and build a stadium; the team was later sold at a loss., The fundamental problem is he was borrowing more than he was really allowed to under state law, Unkovic says., Under Pennsylvania state law, there is a limit on how much a city can borrow. But the limit doesn't apply for debt that is self-liquidating debt that is funding a project that is expected to pay for itself in the long run., In 2007, Harrisburg filed a document called an 8110 b certificate. It was a promise, Bill Cluck says, that all the previous debt borrowed on the incinerator was still self-liquidating that the incinerator would bring in enough money to pay the money that had been already borrowed on it., They knew it wasn't true when it was submitted, and it's never been corrected to this day, Cluck says., And that, according to Cluck, was a crime., There were 17 different revenue projections showing that the incinerator could never earn back all the money that had been borrowed., So how was it that nobody none of the law firms, none of the financial advisers raised questions about the wisdom of this loan?, We asked, but they refused to respond on the record. And, Cluck notes, all those advisers made hundreds of thousands of dollars in fees from the loan., Almost none of the $30 million the city borrowed in 2007 went to the actual incinerator upgrade. It went to pay back old debt, and to pay fees to the many firms that set up the deal in the first place. The same firms ended up on virtually every deal, Cluck says., To make matters worse, the city ultimately was on the hook. If the incinerator couldn't make the money back, it would fall to the taxpayers of Harrisburg. And this makes Bill Cluck crazy., Where's the advocate for the city to say, 'Hey, you're getting screwed by the terms of these deals,' he says. It never happened., Of course, there is one person who was supposed to be advocate of the city of Harrisburg: the mayor. We tried hard to reach the former mayor for comment. We could not., But consider this. In the 2000s, there was a lot of easy money out there for cities. Wall Street came up with tons of intriguing financial products, that would generate short term cash. There always seemed to be a way to borrow new money to pay back the old., Unkovic says the former mayor may have been taken advantage of. It's like he was a debt addict, he says. And once he got going, he just needed more and more debt, and was sold more and more debt., After the financial crisis, though, things changed. Local officials tried once again to refinance incinerator debt, but nobody wanted to lend the money. The tap has been turned off., With all these debts, Harrisburg is finding it hard to cover basic services.The city has delayed payments to light bulb venders and paper sellers. Restaurants have hired their own security. A local strip club paid to keep the street light on. The city is projected to run out of money entirely in October., A judge has recently ordered a 1% income tax hike on the people still left in Harrisburg. But the city council has promised to fight it.
A man fills his gas tank Wednesday in Lyndhurst, Ohio. Gas prices surged as Isaac approached, but are expected to ease after Labor Day., A man fills his gas tank Wednesday in Lyndhurst, Ohio. Gas prices surged as Isaac approached, but are expected to ease after Labor Day., As a tropical storm was gathering strength last week, fears were growing that the fierce winds might knock out Gulf Coast refineries, send gasoline prices soaring and seriously damage the U.S. economy., But when Hurricane Isaac slammed into the Gulf Coast on Tuesday, it was only a Category 1 hurricane, far weaker than Katrina, the monster storm that hit seven years ago., Now, with the remnants of Isaac dissipating, economists are saying the storm's national economic impact will be relatively muted and short-lived. After the Labor Day weekend, gasoline prices are expected to begin easing down from their storm-related run-up., We would expect damages to be worth less than 0.2 percent of GDP, economist Gregory Daco wrote in an analysis for IHS Global Insight, a forecasting firm. In comparison, Katrina cut nearly a full percentage point from the gross domestic product, a measure of total economic growth., Fortunately for the U.S. economy and for New Orleans itself, Isaac has not replicated the destruction wreaked by Katrina, which killed 1,836 people and inflicted total property damage of about $120 billion, Daco said., U.S. regular gasoline prices (dollars per gallon), Source: Energy Information Administration, Credit: NPR, Hurricane Isaac caused from $700 million to $2 billion in insured onshore losses, according to a late Thursday report by AIR Worldwide, a disaster modeler. That amount would leave Isaac well outside the 10 most costly U.S. hurricanes, the report concluded., Of course, for millions of people in the path of Isaac's winds and rain, the local damage is immense. Entire neighborhoods remain underwater, hundreds of thousands of people still have no electricity, roads and bridges have been damaged, and yet-untold numbers of cars and boats are in bad shape. At least four people were killed in Louisiana and Mississippi., Ahead of the Labor Day weekend, many small businesses in beach-resort areas are scrambling to get ready for tourists, and the thousands of people who were evacuated from their homes are trying to get back to their jobs., As economist Daco put it, while the storm's impact is minor at the national level, it is nontrivial at the level of affected states and municipalities., Isaac's biggest potential for harming the broader economy involved the energy sector. Gulf of Mexico crude oil represents about 28 percent of total U.S. production. As the hurricane approached, nearly all of the region's oil production was shut down. Many Gulf Coast refineries also voluntarily shut down operations., But now, with the storm gone from the Gulf, companies are preparing to restart operations. Worst-case scenarios are now out of the picture, so the outlook is improving for crude oil. Wholesale gasoline rose about 20 cents per gallon in anticipation of Isaac, but they have fallen back 10 cents since their Aug. 27 peak, Daco concluded. Meanwhile, retail gasoline prices have risen about 10 cents, but the potential for further increases seems limited., AAA, the auto club, agreed that gas prices are likely to ease after a recent surge., The good news for motorists is gas prices will likely retreat to pre-Isaac levels by next week, and continue to drop as demand tapers off and gas stations switch to less expensive winter-blended gasoline, John Townsend, a spokesman for AAA Mid-Atlantic, said in a statement., Doug Mauro, owner of Historic Oak Hill Inn in Natchez, Miss., said in a phone interview that although the eye of the hurricane passed almost directly over the town, the wind didn't do much serious damage, and now the Labor Day weekend is looking promising., We had lots of rain, but we were lucky ... the wind was not too bad, he said. We had one couple who canceled yesterday, but they are coming back today., Mauro said he doesn't expect elevated gas prices to hurt too much either in Natchez. People have gotten used to the higher prices now, he said.
Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke arrives for a dinner at the Jackson Hole Economic Symposium on Thursday., Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke arrives for a dinner at the Jackson Hole Economic Symposium on Thursday., As the AP reads it, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke stopped just short of committing the Fed to any specific move, such as another round of bond purchases to lower long-term interest rates., Bernanke gave a speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium in Jackson Hole, Wy. today. As with all his speeches, it was being closely watched for signs on what the Federal Reserve would do next., With the unemployment rate stagnant, would the Fed unleash further stimulus? Or would the relative good news on the consumer spending and housing fronts we've gotten in recent weeks be enough to stave off new action?, The New York Times came to a similar conclusion as the AP, saying that Bernanke pushed hard for new steps to spur growth., Here's a key part taken from the chairman's prepared remarks. You can decide what it means:, The stagnation of the labor market in particular is a grave concern not only because of the enormous suffering and waste of human talent it entails, but also because persistently high levels of unemployment will wreak structural damage on our economy that could last for many years., Over the past five years, the Federal Reserve has acted to support economic growth and foster job creation, and it is important to achieve further progress, particularly in the labor market., The full text of the chairman's speech is posted on the Federal Reserve website., Update at 10:40 a.m. ET. More Mixed Messages:, The AP reports on another piece of economic news, which is also mixed:, Factory orders rose 2.8 percent in July, the biggest overall advance in a year, reflecting sizable gains in demand for motor vehicles and airplanes, the Commerce Department said Friday. But core capital goods orders, viewed as a good proxy for investment spending, plunged 4 percent, the fourth setback in the past five months., Update at 10:27 a.m. ET. Markets Rally:, The Dow jumped more than 100 points and the Nasdaq jumped about half a percent, after the news., Update at 10:18 a.m. ET. CNBC Has A Different Reading: , CNBC is rolling with this headline: Bernanke at Jackson Hole: No More Fed Easing, For Now., The network says the speech is simply a reiteration of what he said after the Fed's Open Markets Committee meeting Aug. 1., We'll note that in that statement, the Fed was using phrases like Growth in employment has been slow... This time around they use the term stagnant.
California farmer Erik Freese pulls down a healthy ear of corn that has been genetically engineered to produce its own pesticide. He says genetic engineering has helped him to farm more sustainably., California farmer Erik Freese pulls down a healthy ear of corn that has been genetically engineered to produce its own pesticide. He says genetic engineering has helped him to farm more sustainably., This November, voters in California will decide whether the state should require labels on foods with genetically engineered ingredients. If the initiative, known as Proposition 37, passes, manufacturers would have to say somewhere on the front or the back of the food's packaging if the product contains or may contain genetically engineered ingredients. In the U.S. the vast majority of corn, soybeans, canola and sugar beets are genetically engineered. Those ingredients are in everything from salad dressing to ice cream., As The Salt reported in May, over hundreds of thousands of Californians signed a petition to get the labeling initiative on the ballot., So far supporters of the labeling measure have raised $3.4 million. The amount is dwarfed by the nearly $25 million raised by opponents. That includes Monsanto, Campbell's and General Mills, which declined to comment for this story., Despite the cash disadvantage, recent surveys have the Label It camp polling well ahead of the opposition. Still, they're bracing for a possible onslaught of anti-labeling ads between now and Election Day., For more, listen to the story on All Things Considered.
On a corner in Washington, D.C., where stores burned during riots 44 years ago, there's now a plaza where farmers sell produce on Saturday mornings., On a corner in Washington, D.C., where stores burned during riots 44 years ago, there's now a plaza where farmers sell produce on Saturday mornings., Farmers markets are popping up in cities all across the country, and people expect lots of different things from them: Better food, of course, but also economic development and even friendlier neighborhoods., At its core, though, the farmers market is a business, and it won't survive unless the farmer makes money., So what's the key to success for these markets?, On a recent weekend, I took a small tour of the urban farmers market universe at least the universe in and around Washington, D.C. My route went from rich neighborhoods to poor ones; from well-established markets to those just getting off the ground., I start with one of the most well-established markets, run by Jim Crawford of New Morning Farm., Forty years ago, when Crawford got into organic farming, such markets were rare in Washington. So Crawford had his pick of neighborhoods., He tried several but settled on one of the wealthier ones, on the northwest side of the city. Every Saturday, he sets up tables and tents in front of a small private school., Around here, the median household income is $170,000 a year. And Crawford says that does help. It isn't cut-and-dried that this is only for high-income neighborhoods. It definitely isn't, he says. On the other hand, you have to have people who can maybe afford to pay a little more than the lowest prices in the supermarket. Because we can't afford to grow stuff and sell it for those prices., Crawford just raised his tomato prices, because blight is cutting into his supply. He bumped the red organic ones up to $3.20 a pound. The scarcer heirlooms are $4.20 a pound., And still, they sell, despite the competition. There are regular grocery stores, including a Whole Foods, just a few blocks away., The Four Mile Run Farmers and Artisans Market sits beside a park in a strip of suburbia that was neglected for a long time., The Four Mile Run Farmers and Artisans Market sits beside a park in a strip of suburbia that was neglected for a long time., I don't pay attention to prices, which I know is really bad, confesses a loyal customer named Isabel. She cares about taste, and when she talks about it, her eyes get bright with enthusiasm. Some things just taste better, and when you bring them to relatives, they say, 'Where did you get those tomatoes?' , This market now has lots of company, and markets are moving into new surroundings., I drive two miles southeast, across Rock Creek Park, which has long been seen as a dividing line in the city between rich and poor, white and black. Here is the neighborhood of Columbia Heights, in the heart of the city. In 1968, after Martin Luther King Jr. was killed, riots and looting broke out here. But over the past few years, Columbia Heights has gone from troubled to trendy., On the corner where stores burned 44 years ago, there's now a plaza where kids run through fountains and where farmers like Matt Harsh sell produce on Saturday mornings., You need two things for a good farmers market: pent-up demand and lots of disposable income, says Harsh. With all the young people moving into this community, you've got that disposable income coming up, and you got tons of pent-up demand. There's just no place to get stuff., But there aren't just young people with money here. About a third of the produce that Harsh sells is paid for with money from programs that provide food assistance to low-income families, such as the federal Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) and the Women, Infants and Children (WIC) program. Private donors have stepped in to boost the value of those benefits, when they're used to shop for fruit and vegetables at this market. The ability to use those benefits at this market, in fact, has been one of the keys to its success., Amy Sahalu is waiting in line to pay for some of Harsh's vegetables. She grew up in Ethiopia, and she comes here partly because it feels a little bit like open-air markets back home. There's only one drawback: A little bit expensive here, she says. But it tastes good for me., This market has turned into a kind of low-key celebration of urban community and country food., A lot of people would love to see the same thing happen in places that aren't quite so up-and-coming., So the new farmers market frontier is in places like Shipley Terrace, on the southeastern edge of Washington., According to the Census Bureau, the median household income in this neighborhood is about $27,000 a year. Two-thirds of the families don't have fathers living with them., Yet there's a farmers market here: the Ward 8 Farmers Market. And in some ways, it's just like the ones across town., The customers here are looking for the same thing., Fresher produce, locally grown, says Steve Hair., So you know where your food is coming from, and I like that, says Carlos Graham., But there also are ways in which life is different on the farmers market frontier. The making-money part is tougher., James Smith sells fresh vegetables here. He says there are only enough customers at this market to support one stand like his., When you've got two or three people selling the same product, then everybody lose money, he says softly. Nobody makes money. I drive 80 miles to get here. And if I don't make any money at all, why come here?, And yet, almost in the next breath, Smith tells me it's more than a business., I'm here for the people, he says. I like the money, but I'm here for the people more than the money. People on this side don't have as much money as other folks do. They need to eat, too. So we need to take care of those, also., Markets like this usually have volunteers and nonprofits behind them, and they have goals that go way beyond making money., When John Gloster helped set up the Ward 8 Farmers Market, there was no real grocery store anywhere for miles around. We have done a great job of making foods available that people perceived previously as being outside of their budget, he says., At other frontier markets, the healthy food is a way to build a community. For instance, across the Potomac River in Virginia, the Four Mile Run Farmers and Artisans Market sits beside a park in a strip of suburbia that was neglected for a long time., The park was a place that nobody wanted to go, says Kevin Beekman, who helped get this market off the ground., On Sunday mornings, there's now food and usually some music., Beekman says the vendors here are doing OK, but not great. In other ways, though, the market has been an amazing success. He used to fill a garbage bag with trash every weekend, but now, he says, nobody even bothers to litter. It's so much more of a pleasure to be in the neighborhood. Folks in the high-rise across the street will come down. They'll say, 'I don't know what this is all about, but I'm happy that this is in my neighborhood.' , Are they shopping here? I ask., Beekman pauses for just a moment. They're starting to, he says.
Grimes Sweetcorn worker Paulette Vandyke waits to sell fresh corn in Grimes, Iowa. The drought has pushed the price of corn per bushel up nearly 40 percent in the past two months., Grimes Sweetcorn worker Paulette Vandyke waits to sell fresh corn in Grimes, Iowa. The drought has pushed the price of corn per bushel up nearly 40 percent in the past two months., For every farmer who is hurting this year during the drought, others are benefiting. Many fields in the South, Northwest and Upper Midwest are producing bountiful corn crops. And because the drought has pushed prices to record highs, farmers who have corn to sell expect a terrific payday., The corn has actually really, really taken off all the way through season. It's grown fast. It's been accelerated. The corn looks really good now, says John Scott, whose family farm in Sargeant, Minn., is just bursting with corn., Scott peels back a corn husk to reveal a bright, yellow ear. He grows about 2,500 acres of corn on several farms about 100 miles south of Minneapolis. The stalks are deep green, and they sway 10 feet in the air, just the way they should act this time of year., I would say this field would probably be a 185- to 200-bushel yield. That's exceptional for this year, he says., Scott didn't completely dodge the drought. Some of his other fields are dry and might not yield as much corn. But with corn prices topping more than $8 a bushel, and about half of his crop still up for sale, being average could still mean well over $1 million in revenue this year., A few steps from the field, he shows off the newest addition to the farm a Hagie Sprayer. It's a massive machine with tires that are 6 feet tall and a sprayer that folds out 120 feet wide., It's probably the most expensive machine I've ever bought. What this rig allows us is, it's so tall, that we can actually go through tall corn and actually spray the fungicide onto the corn, Scott says., Scott bought the sprayer, paying $320,000 for it. He also bought a top-of-the-line Lexion Caterpillar combine for another $300,000. When times are good, he puts the money he earns right back into his farm. If we would have had droughted corn, I would have used my same machine. I wouldn't have purchased anything, that's for sure., Jake Putnam with the Idaho Farm Bureau says despite the terrible drought in the Midwest, many of his farmers are buying big-ticket items like combines and irrigation pipes., For the farm operations that do well this year, they take the money, and they immediately will reinvest that money back into capital, Putnam says. And it's such a tight cycle that you won't see even the most profitable farmers do anything like take a vacation or stuff like that. It goes right back to the operation, for the most part., Putnam says Idaho corn farmers expect to reap record profits this year as some farmers there benefit mightily from other farmers' misfortune. That's because most Idaho farmers irrigate their fields with water stored in reservoirs since winter., Down south in states like North Carolina, some farmers are also smiling more this harvest season. The drought has pushed the price of corn up nearly 40 percent in the past two months, from about $5.50 to more than $8 a bushel., Ron Heiniger is a corn specialist at North Carolina State University. He says about 70 percent of North Carolina farmers have already begun to harvest their field crop. After two dry years in the state, farmers expect one of their best harvests ever., In fact, I had a grower tell me, he says, 'I'm thinking about making my truck driver take an insurance because every semi-load of corn that leaves my farm is like a semi-load of gold. I need a Brink's truck just to follow it to the market 'cause I got so much money in there,' he says with a laugh., Heiniger says corn producers are looking to gather and store their corn as quickly as possible. There may be money standing in the fields right now, but high corn prices won't reap benefits for anyone if a hurricane or other unexpected weather event hurts the crop before it makes it to the bin.
Wal-Mart founder Sam Walton is one of many people who unleashed huge changes in the U.S. economy and never called the White House home., Wal-Mart founder Sam Walton is one of many people who unleashed huge changes in the U.S. economy and never called the White House home., With Election Day drawing closer, each presidential candidate is pushing harder to make the case that he would be a better leader for the economy., And voters are listening to the pitches. A recent Washington Post-ABC poll showed that nearly 3 in 4 Americans say the candidate's approach to the economy will be a major factor in deciding between President Obama and Gov. Mitt Romney., But a clear-eyed look at past campaigns shows that presidential leadership is just one of many threads that can weave together a strong economy. Other factors such as technological innovations, new business practices, shifts in other countries' politics, social changes and so much more may shape the economy more than any president., Consider this example: If you had to pick one figure from the 1970s whose ideas are having a major impact on your daily life today, would you pick President Jimmy Carter or Apple co-founder Steve Jobs?, While presidential politics can get lots of attention from journalists, the factors that really end up reshaping our work lives may not get recognition until many years or even decades later., Again, take that example of President Carter. In the 1980 election cycle, the Democratic incumbent was seeking votes to continue his fairly liberal economic policies. His opponent, Republican Ronald Reagan, wanted to make dramatic changes by cutting taxes, curbing union power and accelerating deregulation. Pundits predicted the voters' decision would be momentous., At the time, the U.S. economy was in bad shape. The 1970s had been a period of slow growth, high inflation and intermittent energy crises. By early 1980, the economy was shrinking and the outlook was dismal., Reagan won in a landslide and began implementing his tax-cutting policies. Many sectors of the economy improved and stock prices started shooting up. Unemployment declined., So there you have it: The man who was elected president really mattered, no?, Well, yes, but at the same time, many technological and political forces were being unleashed too. Their economic impacts would be immense, perhaps even more consequential than many of the big political decisions of the day., Just one example: In the late 1970s, Carter pushed to give control of the Panama Canal to the Panama government. Transfer of the U.S.-built shipping channel drew sharp criticism from Reagan. Journalists covered the debate heavily., But reporters were paying relatively little attention to Sam Walton, a retailer from a small town in Arkansas. In 1980, he was laying the groundwork for a massive increase in the number of goods that would be shipped into the United States., And few realized how dramatically the 1978 deregulation of the airline industry was starting to transform cargo shipping as the 1980s were beginning., Today we can see that transportation deregulation changed the whole economy, said Peter Belobaba, a principal researcher at the MIT International Center for Air Transportation. Greater efficiencies in air transport not only made just-in-time inventory deliveries possible at factories but also opened up leisure travel. That boosted Orlando, Fla., Las Vegas and many other cities, he said., , Here are 10 people who never ran for president, but whose efforts in 1980 were unleashing huge changes in the U.S. economy., Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates, Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates, THE INNOVATORS, Bill Gates. The computer software genius dropped out of college in 1975 to focus on building the company that he and co-founder Paul Allen called Micro-Soft (a blend of microcomputer and software). In November 1980, as reporters were focusing on the election, Gates was meeting with IBM. He offered to license software to IBM for the new personal computer. IBM agreed, and the geeky guy from Seattle was on his way to transforming the business world., Steve Jobs. In 1980, Apple Computer, started in Jobs' family garage in 1976, became a publicly traded company. Eventually, his company's devices, including smartphones and tablets, would launch a mobile revolution., Steve Case. In 1980, Case graduated from college and kicked off a career as an assistant brands manager for Procter &amp; Gamble. Within a few years, he would use his marketing savvy to help convince Americans that they really needed a computer to communicate. The company he co-founded, AOL, got people to jump at the phrase, You've got mail!, Economist Alfred Kahn, Economist Alfred Kahn, THE REGULATORS, Alfred Kahn. Until the mid-1970s, Kahn was a Cornell University economist who knew almost nothing about flying. Then Carter chose him to serve as the chief architect of airline deregulation. Kahn's efforts in 1978 laid the groundwork for the subsequent deregulation of rail and truck transportation, utilities, telecommunications and financial markets. Those changes transformed much of the economy in the 1980s., Paul Volcker. In 1979, Carter appointed Volcker as chairman of the Federal Reserve, which sets monetary policy and regulates many banks. In 1980, both inflation and interest rates were running into the double digits. He used monetary policy tools to crack down on inflation and is widely credited with being the man who ended the combination of inflation and stagnation that characterized the 1970s., Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, Supreme Court Justice Sandra Day O'Connor, THE WORKPLACE CHANGERS, Sam Walton. By 1980, Walton was a very wealthy man with the fast-growing Wal-Mart chain. But what wasn't well-understood at the time was that he was not just adding stores but launching a logistics revolution. He used 40-foot-long metal intermodal containers to move imports through ports, rail yards and warehouses. This push for efficiency and low-cost sourcing would drive down wages, as well as consumer prices., Sandra Day O'Connor. Female baby boomers were flooding the workplace by 1980, but few women wielded real power. Only one was serving in the Senate, and none had ever been on the Supreme Court. But O'Connor was working her way up, serving on the Arizona Court of Appeals. In 1981, Reagan appointed her to the Supreme Court. Suddenly, it became obvious to all of those boomer women in law school that glass ceilings were starting to shatter., Chinese communist leader Deng Xiaoping, Chinese communist leader Deng Xiaoping, THE GLOBAL TRANSFORMERS, Lech Walesa. In the summer of 1980, Walesa, a Polish shipyard electrician, co-founded Solidarity, the Soviet bloc's first independent trade union. He pushed relentlessly for greater political freedom and helped open up all of Eastern Europe to more democracy and capitalism. By 1983, he had won a Nobel Peace Prize, and he eventually saw the end of Communist rule in Eastern Europe. His efforts helped open up free-market reforms in developing countries and reshaped the European economy., Deng Xiaoping. As the 1980s were beginning, Deng Xiaoping was consolidating his power in China, serving as the huge nation's paramount leader. He opened China to foreign investments and global markets. He also allowed limited private economic competition within China. His policies are credited with transforming China from a closed and poor country into a global economic powerhouse., Ayatollah Khomeini. As the 1980s opened, the ayatollah was settling into his new role as supreme leader of Iran. He had been the leader of the Iranian Revolution in the late 1970s and now was in position to replace the country's leadership with a theocracy. His radicalism helped make the Middle East more unstable and violent. Worries about Iran have prompted businesses to become much more fuel-efficient to reduce dependence on oil from that region., Today, as voters weigh the economic plans of Obama and Romney, who else should they be watching? Who will really change the economy? An energy entrepreneur? A cancer researcher? Add your suggestions in the comments section below.
The number of Americans filing first-time claims for unemployment remained flat, last week, the Employment and Training Administration reports. In the week that ended Aug. 25, a seasonally adjusted 374,000 claims were filed, matching the previous week's total, which was revised up., The four-week moving average increased by 1,500 to 370,250, which Bloomberg reports is a sign that progress in the labor market is faltering amid a plodding economic recovery., What Mark has said the past few weeks still applies:, Claims have stayed in a range between 350,000 and 400,000 all year. The unemployment rate, meanwhile, has also varied little: it's low this year has been 8.1 percent and the high has been 8.3 percent., In other economic news: The AP reports that consumer spending rose 0.4 percent in July the fastest pace in five months., The AP reports:, The increase in income and consumer spending could help boost subpar growth., The report on consumer spending is closely watched because it accounts for 70 percent of economic activity., The economy grew at a tepid annual rate of 1.7 percent in the April-June quarter. Many economists expect growth will hover around 2 percent in the second half of the year, a pace too weak to lower the unemployment rate.
A astronaut cover signed by Neil Armstrong., This week, Americans have been remembering Neil Armstrong. But before he walked on the moon, he had to solve a much more prosaic problem., You're about to embark on a mission that's more dangerous than anything any human has ever done before, Robert Pearlman, a space historian and collector with collectspace.com, told me. And you have a family that you're leaving behind on Earth, and there's a real chance you will not be returning., Exactly the kind of situation a responsible person plans for by taking out a life insurance policy. Not surprisingly, a life insurance policy for somebody about to get on a rocket to the moon cost a fortune., But Neil Armstrong had something going for him. He was famous, as was the whole Apollo 11 crew. People really wanted their autographs., These astronauts had been signing autographs since the day they were announced as astronauts, and they knew even though eBay didn't exist back then, that there was a market for such things, Pearlman said. There was demand., Especially for what were called covers - envelopes signed by astronauts and postmarked on important dates., About a month before Apollo 11 was set to launch, the three astronauts entered quarantine. And, during free moments in the following weeks, each of the astronauts signed hundreds of covers., They gave them to a friend. And on important days the day of the launch, the day the astronauts landed on the moon their friend got them to the post office and got them postmarked, and then distributed them to the astronauts' families., It was life insurance in the form of autographs., If they did not return from the moon, their families could sell them to not just fund their day-to-day lives, but also fund their kids' college education and other life needs, Pearlman said., The life insurance autographs were not needed. Armstrong and Aldrin walked on the moon and came home safely. They signed probably tens of thousands more autographs for free., But then, in the 1990s, Robert Pearlman says, the insurance autographs started showing up in space memorabilia auctions. An Apollo 11 insurance autograph can cost as much as $30,000.
Drought has taken a toll on corn this year, and as a result, a growing number of ethanol plants have closed., Drought has taken a toll on corn this year, and as a result, a growing number of ethanol plants have closed., Standing outside the Central Minnesota Ethanol Co-Op in Little Falls, Minn., there's not a lot going on. The pungent smell of fermentation that typically hangs in the air here is absent. And trucks piled high with corn are nowhere to be seen., They're idled in part because of high corn prices. And it's unclear when that will change., Most of the industry is just breaking even in terms of profitability or actually running at slightly negative margins, says Geoff Cooper, vice president of research and analysis at the Renewable Fuels Association., Cooper says since the start of the summer at least seven ethanol plants are now idle in states like Nebraska, Minnesota, Indiana and Kansas. Including shutdowns from past years, Cooper says about 10 percent of the nation's ethanol plants are now offline. Others, though still operating, are running at 75 percent or 80 percent of capacity., The nation's corn crop won't meet expectations. Some predict it will be only two-thirds of what was planted in the spring., Stacey Hudson, senior research associate at the financial services firm Raymond James &amp; Associates, says many ethanol producers are sandwiched between rising corn prices and marginally profitable fuel prices., With corn at about $8 a bushel these ethanol producers are looking at cash margins of about 8 cents per gallon, which is pretty weak, she says., High corn prices and limited supply have renewed the debate over whether this crop should be going to produce fuel or food., A Push To Ease Biofuel Requirement, This year the federal government says producers should make 13.2 billion gallons of biofuel. Most of that comes from corn., In a series of letters this month, governors and members of Congress petitioned the Environmental Protection Agency to suspend or lower what's called the Renewable Fuel Standard to ease costs for agriculture and food producers., Jason Hill is a professor of bioproducts and biosystems engineering at the University of Minnesota. He says while roughly half of nation's corn supply this year will go to producing ethanol, that ethanol will make up only between 5 and 6 percent of the nation's fuel consumption. So [it has a] very large impact on our corn market, a very small impact on our fuel market, he says., Many farmers are having a difficult time affording the feed for their livestock. Earlier this month, President Obama announced the government would buy up to $170 million in surplus meat as many producers are being forced to sell off their herds to the slaughterhouse., 'We Need 'Em Both', At the Centra Sota feed co-op in Little Falls, the impact of the drought and ethanol plant shutdown is mixed., The company sells feed for dairy cattle, chickens and other livestock., Manager Lon Johnson says the price of a 50-pound bag of cattle feed is up from $13 last year to nearly $17 this year., This already reflects the high prices. Everything's been kind of going up, Johnson says., Well, not everything. Since the ethanol plant shut down, the price Johnson is paying for corn has dropped by 15 to 20 cents per bushel. But he says it ends up being a wash., Sitting in his office, Johnson say he uses a byproduct from the ethanol plant for feed. Now instead of going down the road, Johnson has to drive 80 miles to the next plant to get the partially used corn he mixes into feed., It doesn't make it any easier for us because maybe we can buy our corn 20 cents a bushel cheaper, but it costs me 20 bucks more because we bought corn distillers from the ethanol plant. That's one of the things people a lot of times keep forgetting with an ethanol plant. Even though they're using a lot of corn, they're still putting a lot of feed back into the market, he says. Food versus fuel? I think we need 'em both., The Renewable Fuels Association expects more plants to go offline this year if corn prices stay high and ethanol prices remain relatively low. For now, those tied ever so closely to corn are anxiously awaiting the fall harvest to inject some certainly into their business plan.
The Bureau of Economic Analysis revised its GDP numbers today, saying that during the second quarter of this year, the United States economy grew at a 1.7 percent annual rate., That's up from its original estimate of 1.5 percent., The BEA reports:, The increase in real GDP in the second quarter primarily reflected positive contributions from personal consumption expenditures (PCE), exports, nonresidential fixed investment, and residential fixed investment that were partly offset by negative contributions from private inventory investment and from state and local government spending. Imports, which are a subtraction in the calculation of GDP, increased., Update at 8:41 p.m. ET. Just What Economists Expected: , Business Insider reports that this is exactly the kind of revision economists expected., So the news, This isn't likely to induce much of a reaction., Economists expect a little better growth in the second half of the year after seeing some improvement in July data, the AP reports. But most believe the economy will keep growing at a sub-par rate of around 2 percent.
Two United Airlines planes sit at a terminal at San Francisco International Airport Friday. The airport briefly refused to accept any domestic arrivals Tuesday, after a computer crash disrupted United's system., Two United Airlines planes sit at a terminal at San Francisco International Airport Friday. The airport briefly refused to accept any domestic arrivals Tuesday, after a computer crash disrupted United's system., Many travelers using United Airlines faced delays Tuesday, but they weren't connected to Hurricane Isaac. Instead, the airline's computer network crashed, leaving large parts of its system paralyzed Tuesday afternoon., First noted around 2:15 p.m. EDT, the problems persisted until about 6:30 p.m. EDT, when the airline tweeted that it is in the process of resuming operations and rebooking customers., The snarl of airline traffic led the Federal Aviation Administration to halt arrivals at airports in Newark, N.J.; Houston, and San Francisco. The order to stop those arrivals has now been lifted, according to The Florida News Journal., News of the outage spread quickly via Twitter and other outlets. The FAA said that problems affecting United's airport computers seemed to be largely resolved by 5:30 p.m. EDT, but many passengers will see their travels disrupted well into Tuesday night particularly with many Gulf Coast-area airports closed because of Hurricane Isaac., United's main website was down for part of Tuesday afternoon. At 6:05 p.m. EDT, the airline tweeted, The website is up, but not fully functional. The message also thanked passengers for their patience. Elsewhere on Twitter, passengers were reporting offers to book new flights at no added cost., According to NPR's David Schaper, the problems stemmed from the airline's reservation and booking system. But because the same system also controls boarding passes, flight check-in and other functions, the outage had a widespread effect that left United passengers stranded at many airports., In Denver, where the city's airport is one of United's main hubs, The Denver Post's Kristen Leigh Painter spoke to several people who had been stranded. One was Bruce Rehburg, a passenger who said he'd been sitting on a plane in Houston's airport for more than an hour and a half., The pilot told passengers that he knows the computer is safe and ready for takeoff, but the technology is locked, Painter writes. 'We are ready to go, and now in the age of computers, we can't take off,' Rehburg said.
Portland-based GO Box, a service that provides and cleans reusable take-out boxes for local food trucks, hopes to keep some of the city's food waste from going in the dumpster., Portland-based GO Box, a service that provides and cleans reusable take-out boxes for local food trucks, hopes to keep some of the city's food waste from going in the dumpster., With nearly 700 food carts licensed last year, Portland, Ore., is arguable a leader in the mobile food revolution. Lucky residents can choose between Iraqi-Jewish sabich, yeasted Belgian liege waffles, or Indonesian rendang, all served out of a friendly window on the sidewalk. But all of these mobile meals come with a downside namely, trash., According to some estimates, food carts dispose of roughly 60,000 containers every month in downtown Portland alone. Some are compostable, some recycleable (though not through Portland's current curbside program), but regardless, city officials say most end up in the garbage. And green-minded cartivores who want to bring their own containers are prevented from doing so by the city's health code., As we've reported, food waste is a giant worldwide mess, but there are many folks taking action on a local scale. Last year, a new Portland company, GO Box, cropped up with a solution to the mountain of clamshell packages. Participating carts stock GO Box's reusable containers, which are made of a blue-tinted #5 plastic, like a more durable version of the standards takeout clamshell., Once containers are used, they are collected at drop-off sites and then professionally cleaned (satisfying our protective friends at the health department). Eaters sign up for a $12 annual membership fee, and each time they drop off a dirty tray, they get a token to exchange for a clean one the next time they dine at a participating cart., Currently about 50 carts participate, along with a handful of restaurants and vendors at the stadium that hosts Portland's soccer team. They pay a nominal fee for each GO Box used (partially offset by the savings on disposables), and receive an incentive for each new member they sign up (as well as the positive publicity from signing onto the program). Founder Laura Weiss has a background in environmental policy, and has been growing GO Box since last summer. IT now boasts about 1,000 subscribers, with more signing up every month. Weiss has been working out the logistics as they scale up figuring out how to locate and staff collection sites, signing restaurants up to volunteer dishwashing services, figuring out a route of bicycle-based deliveries and collections but she says her biggest mission is just getting people to think differently., It's a whole new idea people have to wrap their minds around we don't need to have disposables, she says. Although closed systems like this have existed for years in cafeterias and hospitals, people are just starting to realize that, with a little coordination, a similar practice can take hold among independent cart businesses. The city of Portland recognized GO Box this year with an award for their sustainable businesses practices. Lindsey Maser, with the city's Bureau of Planning and Sustainability, described the program as a win-win for everyone. It was really exciting that she was meeting a demand so many people in Portland wanted it, and nobody was offering it. And cart owners are excited as well. Kevin Scofield dishes out about a half-dozen plate lunches into GO Box containers every day at his Hawaiian cart 808 Grinds. Although he acknowledges that cart space is tight, the frequent drop-offs mean that he can manage a small pile at a time. Obviously we want to make money and do well, but we also want to do the right thing, Scofield says. He's happy to help out another small business as well, and notes that the customers committed to sustainability are happy that he provides the service., Scott Fitzsimons and Genevieve Rades dish out their Carolina barbecue into GO Box containers, and say some customers actually seek them out because of it (GO Box lists participating vendors on its website to share the love). As an environmentalist, Laura Weiss would love to see GO Box spread beyond Portland, and has fielded interested calls from Stockholm to Vancouver, B.C. She acknowledges that there are certain factors required for success, namely the density to support such a system (GO Box currently only offers service in the cart-and-pedestrian-rich downtown corridor). And it relies on food cart cooperation., But even this small service makes an impact based on the numbers of containers cleaned, Weiss estimates that GO Box has already kept nearly 10,000 clamshells out of the waste stream.
In late August of 2008, just as delegates were coming together for their political-party conventions, the U.S. economy was falling apart. Home sales were shutting down, employers were slashing payrolls, and financial institutions were lurching toward chaos., Subsequent weeks saw political leaders and regulators fighting through one gut-wrenching day after another, trying to avert a complete collapse of global markets. On Sept. 24, Republican presidential candidate John McCain temporarily suspended his campaign to help Congress develop financial bailout plans., Today, as the GOP convention gets (briefly) under way, the nation's economic condition is far more stable. The coming political fights over economic issues are likely to be bare-knuckled, but probably not white-knuckled., Although the sense of panic has passed, times are not good for many. Yes, stock prices are up and financial institutions are on firmer footing, but millions of Americans are slipping further from their middle-class moorings. Some 12.8 million people are looking for jobs, and data show middle-class income and wealth are both down from a decade ago., The mixed state of the 2012 economy will provide Republicans and Democrats with much to debate. The spin is best left to political candidates, but the data can tell an objective story about the state of the economy as the conventions begin., The Republicans are meeting this week in Tampa, Fla., and Democrats will meet the following week in Charlotte, N.C. As they gather, this is what we know:, JOBS, The national unemployment rate has been hovering in a narrow range throughout 2012 between 8.1 and 8.3 percent. The rate shifts only a bit each month as economists round and revise the statistics on payrolls and job seekers. Most economists expect the jobless rate to stay in this tight range for the remainder of the year., Young job-seekers look over a list of 85 business participating in a job fair last week in Washington, D.C., Young job-seekers look over a list of 85 business participating in a job fair last week in Washington, D.C., The historical record suggests such a high rate of unemployment dooms an incumbent president. One new study concludes that President Obama's candidacy will fail because no incumbent in recent decades has been re-elected with the jobless rate so high for so long., The incumbency advantage enjoyed by President Obama, though statistically significant, is not great enough to offset high rates of unemployment currently experienced in many of the states, Kenneth Bickers, a political science professor at the University of Colorado, Boulder, said in his study of election outcomes., Then again, the employment picture is brighter than four years ago, when the economy was plunging into the worst recession since the Great Depression. When Obama took office in January 2009, the U.S. economy was losing more than 800,000 jobs a month and the unemployment rate was heading to 10 percent later that year., In 2012, employers have been adding an average of 151,000 jobs each month, about the same pace as in 2011, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. So while the job market could be described as significantly underperforming, it also could be seen as doing much better than it was four years ago, giving candidates and voters much to argue over., HOUSING, The housing market has been in horrible condition since 2007. During the past five years, prices for existing homes have plunged by roughly a third and builders in many markets have virtually stopped putting up houses. Foreclosures and short sales remain common., Sales of new homes, like this one in Palo Alto, Calif., rose 3.6 percent in July., Sales of new homes, like this one in Palo Alto, Calif., rose 3.6 percent in July., Still, many economists see signs of improving conditions, and even strength in specific markets, such as Washington, D.C., and Bismarck, N.D. Mortgage rates have been at record lows this summer, making buying very affordable by historic standards. The latest data from the National Association of Realtors show that the average sale price for an existing home is up about 7 percent this year, compared with last year., While the housing sector may be moving up, the hole remains very deep. We are expecting this market to improve over the second half of this year, but not by much, Patrick Newport, an economist with IHS Global Insight, wrote in an analysis of housing data., STOCK MARKET, The days just after the political parties held their conventions in 2008 were among the most frightening ever experienced by investors alive today. On just one day Sept. 29, 2008 the Dow Jones industrial average plunged 7 percent, wiping out $1.2 trillion., Traders work on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange. The Dow Jones industrial average is nearly back to where it was before the recession hit in 2007., Traders work on the floor of the New York Stock Exchange. The Dow Jones industrial average is nearly back to where it was before the recession hit in 2007., In the past year, the stock market has been doing well. The Dow has shot up to around 13,160, up from about 10,400 last October. This summer saw a major rally. That push helped the closely followed stock market barometer to get back up to nearly where it was in 2007, before the recession began., But trading volume remains extremely light, suggesting that many investors remain wary. In fact, some market analysts predict that a big drop could be coming this September because of bad news coming from the European Union and China. Many also say the coming fiscal cliff, a cluster of major tax and spending changes coming at the end of the year, could frighten away investors who fear a new recession., So while stocks have generally been a positive indicator this year, huge risks may be looming on the horizon.
1 of 4, Jobs on natural gas drilling sites can have funny-sounding names: There are roustabouts, mud men, doodlebuggers and snake wranglers. That last one snake wrangler is exactly what it sounds like., Everyone hates snakes, right?, Even Indiana Jones hates snakes., But not everybody., Matt Wilson loves snakes. He's loved them since he was 6 years old, when he caught a snake and brought it inside to show his mother., My mom said, 'Oh, what do you have, Matt?' I said, 'I don't know what it is, mom.' And she said, 'Oh, that's a snake. Isn't it pretty?' I said, 'Yeah, that's pretty neat.', Wilson has been catching snakes ever since; it's just that these days, he does it professionally. Wilson works on natural gas drilling sites well pads and pipelines. When a worker finds a snake, he calls Wilson., We remove rattlesnakes that are in the way, he says. Then we take them into the woods and release them., Drillers are finding more and more timber rattlesnakes as gas operations expand in northeast Pennsylvania. The snakes are what's called a candidate species they aren't protected, but state regulators think the species may be in danger. So the Pennsylvania Fish and Boat Commission is doing a lot of research to track and monitor them., The commission has convinced energy companies to hire people like Wilson, who remove snakes from drilling sites and record their GPS location. It's an important job, and it's one that Wilson loves., It's just that, sometimes it's hard to explain to people., Basically, they think I'm nuts, he says., Wilson works with Shell, but the company won't let reporters on its drilling sites. So on one of his rare days off, he takes me to the Elk State Forest to look for snakes. Wilson's wife, Paula, comes too. Riding through the forest in a truck, she says she's also loved snakes since she was little., My mom said nobody wanted to ever empty out my pockets on wash day, she says, because they never knew what I was going to have in my pockets. I usually had snakes, or worms, or frogs., Paula and Matt didn't know they were both so into snakes until long after they were married. When Matt found a snake during a camping trip, they both realized their shared interest. Paula now has the same job as Matt, wrangling snakes for natural gas drillers., The snakes do have their own personality, she says. Some are grumpy. Some are real curious as to what you are., Asked what a grumpy snake is like, Paula answers, Oh my. They'll hiss at you, they puff up and they go haaaa., We drive to a natural gas pipeline path and get out of the truck. Matt and Paula grab their tongs and sacks, and we start looking for snakes in rock clusters and bushes., Here we go, Matt says, holding up a snake whose rattle gave off a steady buzzing noise. Just a little tiny guy, that's a yellow face., The snake is yellow and green, and about 3 feet long., Paula says if you catch one snake, it's a good day. We see three., The Wilsons both say their job is hard, but it's worth it so much so that Matt has kept wrangling, despite a near-deadly snake bite in 2002., As proof his work is paying off, Matt points to a recent breakthrough. Three drillers had found a snake on a road, and one wanted to kill it., The Pennsylvania fella said, 'I kill everyone of them I see. I'm a logger, and I don't like them,' Matt says. Well, these fellas, because I had been preaching to them and talking to them they kept him from running the snake over. That probably was the highlight of my summer, at that point., It was probably a highlight for the snake, too.
Cars at the General Motors Assembly plant in Lordstown, Ohio, in 2009., Cars at the General Motors Assembly plant in Lordstown, Ohio, in 2009., The auto industry is big business in Ohio. Billions of dollars' worth of cars and auto parts are made in the state each year. Thousands of unionized auto workers live in Ohio, as do the business owners and employees who make it one of the top auto parts suppliers in the nation., So, the auto bailout is a hot issue and a complicated one., For Republicans in Ohio, the bailout is a tough issue perhaps because of Mitt Romney's initial stance, or perhaps because of the consensus that the bailout worked., But the Romney campaign has started to address the bailout and has put out an ad in Ohio that mentions the closure of General Motors dealerships in the bailout., The ad features a northeast Ohio dealer who says his business closed after GM suspended his credit line in 2009. But the ad was rated half true by PolitiFact because it's unclear whether the dealership was closed because of the bailout or because of a closure plan GM had put into place before that., For a while, Romney's position on the bailout has been a topic of discussion in Ohio. In 2008, he wrote an op-ed that's become well-known for its headline: Let Detroit Go Bankrupt., And for years after, it was widely reported that Romney opposed the bailout., But then this year, it appeared Romney's stance on the bailout shifted., In an interview with Romney on May 4, the day before President Obama was preparing to launch his official re-election campaign at Ohio State University, Romney said that he had indeed backed the bailout because he had pushed for managed bankruptcy, which he says was necessary for the automakers to come back., Question: , The bailout of the American automakers is a big deal here in Ohio; it's likely to come up tomorrow when President Obama is here at Ohio State. You wrote in an op-ed in February that the bailout was quoting here 'crony capitalism on a grand scale.' But your spokesman said that your position I'm quoting him here 'was exactly what President Obama followed, and it infuriates them to hear that.' Can you clarify your position on the automakers' bailout?, Romney:, Well, it's pretty straightforward because before President Obama was even president, back in November when there was a discussion about writing a check to the auto industry or having them go bankrupt, I said they must go bankrupt. That's the only way to get them back on their feet if they're in trouble, they need to go through bankruptcy. And the Obama administration stalled for about six months and finally came to that conclusion. The companies went through bankruptcy. Now they're back on their feet. That was the right course it was the course that I fought for., President Obama's campaign hasn't made a standalone ad for Ohio about the bailout, but has included it in ads addressing the economy, like this one., The auto industry, however, has come up in the campaign of one of Obama's chief backers, Sen. Sherrod Brown. The incumbent Democrat is waging an expensive battle for re-election. He's in an ad that looks like a car commercial, talking about how he and the Buckeye-built Chevy Cruze in the ad with him are both from Ohio., Critics have noted that his automotive co-star has wheels that actually aren't from Ohio. But the Brown campaign says that doesn't distract from the message., And in the Senate race, Brown's Republican challenger, Josh Mandel, largely has been avoiding the bailout issue. He has said he had his own plan to bring back the auto industry, but hasn't addressed that in any ads. And he's actively avoided answering questions about his thoughts on the bailout sometimes awkwardly., Karen Kasler is chief of the Statehouse News Bureau for Ohio Public Radio and Television.
Used bourbon barrels like these at the Goose Island Brewery in Chicago are finding new life by bringing distinctive flavor to beer, cocktails and hot sauce., Used bourbon barrels like these at the Goose Island Brewery in Chicago are finding new life by bringing distinctive flavor to beer, cocktails and hot sauce., Washington, D.C. blogger Sam Hiersteiner is a hot sauce fan turned maker. He's already harvested two pounds of chiles serranos, jalapenos, and habaneros from his 30-plant pepper garden this month, and he's ready to mash them into hot sauce as soon as more ripen. Last year, he mashed fifty pounds total.While he loved the results, he thought it would be even better with a whisper of the flavor imparted by a barrel used for aging bourbon., But finding a used bourbon barrel hasn't been easy. Cocktail creators, beer brewers and home hot sauce makers are all seeking these barrels for their own experiments. Hard to find, expensive to ship, and often large enough to be called another piece of furniture, used whiskey barrels are becoming as difficult to find as a full bottle of Pappy van Winkle., But recently, used barrel seekers and sellers have been finding each other in a mutually beneficial relationship that could be described as the ultimate in recycling., The reason used bourbon barrels are so in demand has a lot to do with the very specific standards the makers of the sweet, smoky whiskey must meet. In 1964, a Congressional resolution declared bourbon a quintessentially American beverage, specifiying that 51 percent of the grain mash must be corn, and that it not be higher than 125 proof., It also required that the charred, white oak barrels in which bourbon matures be used only once for aging the liquor which takes anywhere from four to 25 years.But now these barrels have what can only be called a long and remarkable afterlife., There are plenty of new charred barrels available online. Most coopersmiths (barrel makers)char the wood after the barrel has been built. That's what helps the flavor of the wood release into the liquor. Hiersteiner knew the char would be a good touch for his hot sauce, but the caramel and vanilla tones that are uniquely left behind in a barrel that's previously coddled some bourbon is what he was hoping for., So Hiersteiner called distilleries near D.C., New York and Kentucky. He was stunned at the cost - as much as $200, plus the shipping was about $50, and then there was the issue of size. Most bourbon is aged in thirty gallon barrels. Some distillers use 15 gallon barrels, though far less frequently. Smaller, craft batches of bourbon are being fashioned in three (0.793 gallons) and five liter (1.32 gallons) barrels by artisanal whiskey makers, but they are harder to come by., In any case, that's a lot of hot sauce. Hiersteiner estimates it would take more than 500 pounds of hot peppers to fill a 30 gallon barrel, and it needs to be filled to the brim, or it could dry out and spring a leak., But it's not just the chile heads searching for smaller, used barrels. Visit any modern bar, the sort of place where the bartender is called a mixologist, and you might see a few. At Enzo Restaurant in Newburyport, Mass., Chef Mary Reilly and her team are serving up barrel aged cocktails with a local twist., Enzo's team searched out used barrels, finally sourcing a five liter size from Ryan and Wood, a Massachusetts craft distiller of rye and rum. The size worked, although it's still a bit big. Before committing to a five liter barrel, take a look at your consumption: Do you really want to drink only barrel-aged Negronis for the next year? says Reilly., One of Enzo's signature tipples, the Nonna Rose, a variation on the Rosita, is gently aging in the barrel, gaining wisdom. The tequila and Aperol mix, with touches of dry and sweet vermouth and angostura bitters, emerges from the barrel with a mezcal-like smoky note, according to Reilly, thanks to the flavors imparted by the bourbon., When the barrels are used up, Reilly has a plan: We are going to be trying aging in glass jars using barrel chunks., The distillers are challenged in their quest for barrels, too. A recent article in The New York Times says that some American craft whiskey makers hope to use smaller barrels to try to speed up the aging process., This will put more small barrels on the market, surely, and mixologists, home brewers and craft distillers are hoping that will make sourcing a little easier., In Purcellville, Va., Scott and Becky Harris of Catoctin Creek Distilling will have 150 once used barrels at the end of 2012. Some will be sold to the general public for patio furniture and other decorative items, but most will go to area restaurants Boundary Stone and Mad Fox Brewing Company., Recently, a perfect recylcing circle was created when a friend of the Harris' contacted another friend who owns a maple farm. Now, Pennsylvania-harvested maple syrup is being aged in used Catoctin whiskey barrels. And now, Langdon Wood Syrup is sold at the Catoctin distillery store., So, what happened to hot sauce maker Sam Hiersteiner? After weeks of searching and dozens of phone calls, he connected with Smooth Ambler, a new distiller in W. Virginia. The owners are big hot sauce fans. A barter was born, and Hiersteiner received a 15 gallon barrel just the other day.
Art students rule the campus late-night delivery field. Maybe they're studying the packages., Art students rule the campus late-night delivery field. Maybe they're studying the packages., Millions of college students are heading back to campus soon, and as any parent footing the bill knows, they're hungry for more than just knowledge they want food, and lots of it, at all hours., Forget about standard pizza or Chinese food delivery, and sending Junior with Hot Cheetos and Takis will only get you so far. These days, online sites that offer one-stop-shopping for all kinds of local restaurant menus have made it infinitely easier to get a take out fix. Even smoothies and salads can be delivered to the door, day or night., But the college students with the biggest appetite for late-night munchies might not fit the stereotype you'd imagine., Students from small private schools, and particularly art and design schools, are the most likely to order a midnight snack, according to a recent study by GrubHub, a popular online restaurant aggregator service. The study analyzed food orders placed through their service, and compared the percentage of orders between midnight and 2 a.m. on college campuses to the national average., Topping the list of late-night orderers: the School of the Art Institute in Chicago, Babson College in Boston, Morehouse College in Atlanta, Trinity University in San Antonio, and the Rhode Island School of Design in Providence. Students at these schools placed up to 70 percent more after-midnight food orders than the national average., But what about students at large state universities, some that tend to top the party school list year after year? They are actually the least likely to place late-night delivery orders. Among the schools placing the least nighttime food orders were Ohio State University, the University of Florida, Arizona State University, the University of Central Florida, and Rutgers University., Now, there are lots of reasons why the art students might order more afterhours it's possible they are actually in their dorm rooms or at the library studying more often. Or, maybe they're just hungrier. But more likely, it's because they just don't have a lot of on campus late night dining options., We checked with the top five schools whose students use GrubHub late at night, and none of them offer on campus food options after midnight. However, most of the large universities in the bottom five have campus meal and snacking options open until 3 a.m. and later., Financial concerns might also influence this trend. According to a 2011 survey of admission officials, some small private schools focus on admitting students who can pay their pricey tuition in full, even if they don't stack up academically. And if a student or her family can afford to pay for an expensive education, they might also be more likely to spring for non-essential late night convenience foods.
Eugene Gagliardi, One night in the late 1960s, Eugene Gagliardi was lying awake in bed trying to figure out how to save his company. He was thinking about the Philly cheesesteak., Gagliardi ran a family business that sold hamburgers and other meat to restaurant chains in the Philadelphia area. But within the span of a few months, the company had lost several of its biggest customers., Gagliardi was trying to figure out a way to turn the Philly cheesesteak into something people would want to make at home. But the meat used for the sandwich was, as Gagliardi says, so tough you couldn't chew through it., At 3 in the morning, he had an idea. He got up out of bed and went to the plant and tried it., His idea was complicated he put the meat through the grinder a bunch of times, then he mixed it, put it in a mold, froze it, then he tempered it, then sliced it and, finally, he cooked it and ate it to see if it was any good., It tasted great, he says., Gagliardi had just invented Steak-Umm., And pretty quickly, it blew up. There were TV ads, and people were buying it in grocery stores from Puerto Rico to Hawaii. Eventually, he sold the family business for $20 million., Today, Gagliardi is 82 years old. He tried to retire, but he got bored., So he works in a little house across the street from a cornfield in rural Pennsylvania. Like any good backyard inventor, Gagliardi has turned the garage into a workshop. In his case, that means there are a kitchen and big industrial fridge full of meat. Gagliardi pulls out a chicken and starts cutting it up., Gagliardi has lots of patents on a chicken. He's not patenting the meat itself which, obviously, he didn't invent. He's patenting a way of cutting it up. And, yes, it seems kind of silly to get a patent on a way of cutting meat. But it's not like Gagliardi is going to come sue you if you cut meat a certain way in your kitchen. The patents mean he can work as a small inventor and sell or license his ideas to big companies., We tend to think of innovation as being all about high-technology. But at its core, innovation means coming up with new, useful ideas. Those ideas can come from some 16-year old trying to make a genius new iPhone app in his bedroom. But they can also come from an 82-year-old guy in a converted garage trying to figure out a better way to cut a thigh., This is the original popcorn chicken, Gagliardi says. Also known as Patent No. 5,266,064: Method of making a food product from the thigh of a bird and product made in accordance with the method. Gagliardi sold this idea to KFC in the 1990s and it became a huge hit., Gagliardi has lots more ideas. He says he's made some breakthroughs recently with the drumstick. But that patent is still pending, and he's cagey about the details.
Runner Tom Howard holds up the merchandise at a grocery auction in Dallas, Pa., in 2009. These auctions are becoming more popular as people look for deals on food that's past its prime., Runner Tom Howard holds up the merchandise at a grocery auction in Dallas, Pa., in 2009. These auctions are becoming more popular as people look for deals on food that's past its prime., Every year, U.S. grocers discard $10 billion to $15 billion in unsold products. The items might be damaged, discontinued, seasonal or food that's just close to its sell-by date., Some of those products might be sent to a landfill, contributing to the massive food waste problem. Some go to a food bank or even get delivered to shelters, as with this company in Boulder, Colo. But increasingly, they might also be resold to the public. Grocery auctions are joining salvage grocery and dollar stores as a popular clearinghouse for food that's past its prime., On one summer Saturday afternoon, around 80 people have filled the folding the chairs at the Chesapeake Auction House in St. Leonard, Md. Grocery auctions have been growing in popularity since the recession as a way to get a lot of food for not a lot of money. Today, bidders have come for deals like frozen chicken at just over $1 per pound, blueberry granola for $1.50 and a large bag of chips for $1.50., Dave Ring and his wife, Mary, live nearby and are veterans of the grocery auction. It's become a fun weekend outing for the two of them., We've been coming to the food auctions for who knows how long, Dave says. Get what we want; sometimes we get too much., The Rings and other attendees have come prepared with huge coolers, insulated bags and boxes to bring home their haul. Some are buying for big families and in at least one case home economics classrooms., This auction and others like it are organized by people who make their living buying up food and other products from stores and warehouses that are trying to unload it, quickly. But the exact details of where it all comes from is sort of a trade secret., 'We've Lost Some Of Our Food Knowledge', It's not illegal to sell most expired food, but many Americans are pretty attached to sell-by and best-by dates., Jonathan Bloom, author of a book on food waste called American Wasteland, says many people have grown to fear those expiration dates., I think we've lost some of our food knowledge, Bloom says. And we're not sure when something is good or not., He says the USDA encourages manufacturers to put expiration dates on meat and dairy products, but that's only to indicate quality, not safety. The dates are only required on infant formula., But somewhere along the line, Bloom says, expiration dates became a strict cutoff point for some consumers. Simply following those expiration dates is something that many Americans just do because it's clear to them and it's easy, he says., Bloom says there are consequences to that kind of thinking. In the store, it means food gets pulled off the shelf well before its labeled end date. A supermarket doesn't want you to be horrified when you purchase nearly expired crackers. It wants you to keep coming back., They know if they can get people to buy their food for the course of their shopping life, that's infinitely more valuable than one package of food, he says., Wal-Mart Changes The Dating Game, Grocery manufacturers like expiration dates for the same reason. Until a few years ago, some of them used Julian dating on their products, where an expiration date appeared as a long number. You could figure out the shelf life of something if you knew the formula, but it wasn't immediately obvious., But in 2004, the world's largest retailer, Wal-Mart, said it wanted those dates clear and upfront. Many manufacturers had to change their coding system., Rutgers University professor Dale Rogers studies supply chains. He says when manufacturers made that change, they seized the opportunity to shorten the shelf life of some shelf-stable foods for marketing reasons., Vinegar had seven years of shelf life because, what does vinegar turn into? It turns into vinegar, Rogers says., To make it appear fresher, he says they cut its shelf life down to a single year., They don't believe that consumers really want to buy a product that is five or six years old, he says. Before the open-code dating, there's a likelihood that consumers did buy vinegar that was more than a year old., Unsellable Food Moves Online, Dave Ring, the grocery auction veteran, says he doesn't put too much stock in sell-by dates. In fact, he had no hesitation before diving into some yogurt he'd just purchased at the auction., I can tell you, we've been coming a long time; I've never gotten anything bad, Ring says., There might be minor changes in the taste, texture or appearance of expired foods. But eating yogurt that expired at midnight probably won't hurt you. Ring didn't even know how old his was., I have no idea; I didn't ask, he says with a laugh. Don't really care it's good!, It was a good deal too just $2.50 for a case of 12., If the grocery auction trend continues, it may be only a matter of time before you can shop for the same sort of food online. In the United Kingdom, there's a website, Approved Food, for just that purpose., Right now our most popular product is a Cadbury's Creme Egg, says Dan Cluderay, who runs the site. We actually just bought like, over a million eggs., In two weeks, he had sold 300,000 of them. If you're still not convinced that the food is any good, check out the video below. Last year, Cluderay's company appeared on the BBC show Food Fighters. The host took some samples to people on the street, who tested Cluderay's food against fresher versions of the same product. Most people had trouble discerning any differences between the old and new ones., A chemist also tested the samples for bacteria count and type. The result? There was nothing scary in the old food., As his business grows, Cluderay says he is thinking about trying to translate his model to the U.S. market. He says he's confident there will always be a price point at which no one can turn down a Cadbury egg., Approved Food on the BBC show, Food Fighters.
Three generations of the Traub family are farmers., Three generations of the Traub family are farmers., This summer's drought has hit more than half the states in the country. Crops are suffering, but farmers might not be. Most farmers have crop insurance., U.S. taxpayers spend about $7 billion a year on crop insurance. It's our largest farm subsidy., And this subsidy goes in part to farmers who will tell you themselves they aren't so sure about the whole idea. I have an aversion to it, says Jim Traub, a corn and bean farmer in Fairbury, Illinois. But you're not going to turn it down., Traub is attending a workshop at the Fairbury library on how to collect on his government-subsidized crop insurance. He brought the whole male half of his family three generations of Traub farmers to today's workshop. They're all named John or Jim., All the Traubs will file losses this year. But all of Traubs also feel uncomfortable that taxpayers will help cover those losses., Everyone in here is a millionaire, John Traub says. In all, farmers assembled at the Fairbury library have hundreds of millions dollars in equity in farmland., John Traub says he and his family can survive a bad year or two. He is certainly wealthier than younger farmers. But on average, farmers make more than the typical American., Which is one reason why economists like University of California Davis professor Daniel Sumner don't like the government giving farmers subsidies., Sumner says ski resorts suffered last winter when there wasn't a lot of snow. The government doesn't say, Sorry you didn't have a lot of skiers. Here's a check., But farmers say farming is different. Donald Bielfeldt, a crop insurance agent in Anchor Illinois, says that the government needs to pay to insure farmers., Somebody has to raise the cattle, hogs, chicken. I mean, that's what you live on.... We have to protect the farmer, so that they don't all go broke. And that's what crop insurance is all about., But even without insurance, Traub says, most farmers would not go broke from this one bad season., The insurance certainly helps, though. Most eligible farmers are covered. And a small number even stand to make more this year from their crop insurance than they would actually farming., Congress is working on a new Farm Bill. One of the biggest changes being proposed is an expansion of crop insurance.
Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke talks to educators Aug. 7 in Washington, D.C. At their most recent meeting, many Fed members backed action to boost the economy., Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke talks to educators Aug. 7 in Washington, D.C. At their most recent meeting, many Fed members backed action to boost the economy., The Federal Reserve could take more steps to boost the struggling U.S. economy. That's according to minutes released Wednesday of the Federal Open Market Committee's July 31-Aug. 1 meeting., Many members judged that additional monetary accommodation would likely be warranted fairly soon unless incoming information pointed to a substantial and sustainable strengthening in the pace of the economic recovery, the minutes said. [PDF], The minutes didn't say what the Fed is likely to do next, but they indicate many officials supported keeping the federal funds rate at exceptionally low levels at least through late 2014. Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke could address the issue Aug 31 in Jackson Hole, Wyo., where he will address central bankers. The Associated Press reports that the Fed's boldest move would be to launch a new bond-buying program, which would lower long-term interest rates and boost both spending and borrowing., NPR's Jim Zarroli reported on the minutes for our Newscast Unit. Here's what he says:, According to minutes from the meeting, Fed officials said new stimulus measures may be needed soon if growth doesn't pick up. The minutes suggest that support is building within the Fed for some kind of new action. What that might be the minutes don't say. Fed officials could begin another round of bond buying. They could also send a signal that they will keep interest rates low beyond 2014. According to the minutes, the growth rate is slower than policymakers anticipated, and Fed officials have lowered their growth forecasts. The minutes indicate there's growing concern about an external economic shock like a meltdown in the European banking sector., In a statement after its August meeting, the Fed noted growth had slowed in the first half of the year notably in consumer spending and job growth., But as the AP says:, The issue of whether the Fed will announce any major moves in September has been thrown into doubt by economic improvements since the its last meeting. Gains have been made in such areas as hiring, housing and consumer spending., The next meeting of Fed officials is Sept. 12-13., In a bid to drive down long-term rates, the Fed has already bought $2 trillion in Treasury bonds and mortgage-backed securities., But the struggling economy is only one of the Fed's problems. More immediately it might have to step in if the economy goes off a fiscal cliff if Congress doesn't step in by the end of the year when spending cuts and tax increases go into effect unless there's a budget agreement., The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office warned Wednesday the fiscal cliff would push the U.S. into a recession next year. [PDF] The CBO also said that unemployment would rise to around 9 percent and the economy would shrink 0.5 percent in 2013., Bloomberg has a more detailed analysis of the Fed's minutes while the The Wall Street Journal has collected economists' reactions.
1 of 10, On the fishing-boat piers of New England, nearly everyone knows a fisherman who was lost at sea., Boat captain Joe Neves remembers when a crew member got knocked overboard. We heard him screaming 'Help me!' Neves says, grimacing. But you know, on the water at night, your head is like a little coconut. They didn't find him., Mike Gallagher discovered a friend who was entangled in still-running hydraulics. I knew right away he was dead, he says., And Fred Mattera was fishing 125 miles off the coast of Cape Cod when the 21-year-old son of a close friend succumbed to poisonous fumes in a nearby boat. That was a brutal week in this port, he says., The Deadliest Catch, The Bureau of Labor Statistics ranks commercial fishing as the deadliest job in the United States. And despite the popular notion from reality TV's Deadliest Catch, which features Alaskan crab fishermen, the most dangerous American fishery is in the Northeast., From 2000 to 2009, workers in the Northeast's multi-species groundfish fishery (which includes fish such as cod and haddock) were 37 times more likely to die on the job as a police officer., A National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health report shows that 70 percent of those deaths and those in the second-deadliest fishery, Atlantic scallops, followed disasters such as a vessel catching fire, capsizing or sinking. Most of the rest came from onboard injuries or falling overboard often caused by heavy overhead equipment., Not one of those who fell overboard and drowned was wearing a life jacket., An investigation by the Center for Public Integrity, NPR News and WBUR in Boston found that despite earning the odious ranking as America's deadliest job, commercial fishing in the Northeast operates in a cultural tradition and regulatory environment that thwarts promising safety measures., Out To Sea, Out Of Mind, Despite the strikingly high fatality rate in the fishing industry, pushes for reform have taken decades to come to fruition. In 1988, Congress required fishing boats to carry life boats, personal flotation devices and other safety equipment., Yet while the Coast Guard mandates seaworthiness inspections of passenger ferries and other commercial vessels, fishing boats are not inspected., We've ... requested authority to do inspections on vessels, says Jack Kemerer, chief of the fishing vessels division of the Coast Guard. Congress did not include that power in the U.S. Coast Guard Authorization Act of 2010., So I can't answer why or why not, Kemerer says. But, you know, it's not that we haven't asked for it in the past., The Last Of The Ocean Cowboys, Most fishermen don't want to be supervised. Some are fatalistic about their life on the seas. New England fishermen used to buy steel-toed boots, believing that if they fell into the frigid Atlantic, it was better to drown faster. Others espouse a rugged individualism and see themselves as the last cowboys on the ocean., At Chatham Harbor on Cape Cod, Bill Amaru runs one of the last cod-fishing boats from a harbor that used to be so prolific, fish markets labeled cod Chathams. Now, strict federal rules limit how much he can catch. Many other cod fishermen have gone out of business. Amaru doesn't like the idea of the feds inspecting his boat., If there's a resentment to these kinds of rules, Amaru says as he moors his boat in the harbor, it's based on the overall huge number of regulations that have come down on our industry in the last decade so much federal 'nanny state,' kind of telling us how to operate when I think I have a pretty good understanding of what I need to do to keep safe., Still, the 2010 law requires boat owners like Amaru to prove that their safety equipment is up to date. Coast Guard checks have forced many fishermen to throw out old and disintegrating life rafts, and replace the expired batteries from their emergency signal beacons., But just because a boat has updated safety gear doesn't mean the crew knows how to use it., 'We Will Make This A Safer Industry', When Fred Mattera raced his boat to help fishermen overcome by poisonous fumes in a nearby boat in 2001, he didn't know exactly what to do to help them. The radio was no help, either., What I heard there was this hodgepodge [of] try this, try that, Mattera remembers. And nobody knew for certain., When 21-year-old Steven Follett, the son of a close friend, died, Mattera was frustrated. Some people in port called him a hero for trying. Being a hero is ... someone survives, he says, shaking his head., Mattera told his friend he would make good come from the loss of life. I just said, I promise you, we need to change the culture. We will make this a safer industry., The incident turned Mattera into a safety evangelist. Earlier this month, he helped the crews of two boats organize a disaster training and man-overboard exercise., 'Get Your Panic Out Now!', In one exercise, crew members clumsily put on bright orange-red survival suits. Insulated, watertight and buoyant, the suits cover each fisherman from head to toe; only their faces are exposed. They step off the boat into the calm dockside water. But even in these conditions, wearing what some guys call a Gumby suit feels claustrophobic to some, and they thrash around until they get their bearings., Get your panic out now! Fred Matter shouts from the deck. The crew members are practicing abandoning ship in the case of a fire or capsizing. The immersion suits are designed to keep them alive and afloat in the icy Atlantic until someone can rescue them., Mattera coaches them to link up with each other back-to-back and paddle together over to a life raft and climb in., When it's all over, the crew looks winded., There's a 'Holy crap!' issue to it, boat captain Norbert Stamps says of the training. You jump in, you kind of realize that this isn't fun and games. This is real serious stuff. And you gotta practice, and you gotta know what to expect., Crew member Mike Gallagher says fishermen-organized trainings are becoming more common. To be honest with you, he says, the safety thing hasn't really been paid much attention to until the past several years. Really, it's been overlooked., Learning From Alaska, Alaskan waters had been viewed as the most hazardous place for commercial fishing that is, until a closer focus on safety reduced the number of fatalities in those fisheries., I believe that fishermen want to be safe, says National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health epidemiologist Jennifer Lincoln, who's based in Alaska. They just want things to be practical. They want the solutions to really address the hazards that exist., In Alaska, fishermen, state regulators and the Coast Guard have worked together to make fishing less deadly:, That kind of safety progress is what Fred Mattera and others want to replicate in the Northeast, the home of today's deadliest catch. Since that deadly accident in 2001, Mattera has trained hundreds of fishermen at Point Judith in Narragansett, R.I. But he's not done., I'm just a fisherman, Mattera says. That's what I loved, and that's what I did for a long time. I promised a family we'd make a difference. [As long as] I'm still breathing, that's what we're going to strive to do., Mattera hopes that someday, the deadliest job in America will only be as dangerous as it has to be, and not one bit more., Our stories about dangers in the commercial fishing industry were jointly reported by the Center for Public Integrity, WBUR in Boston and NPR News. The stories are part of CPI's Hard Labor series on workplace safety.
Lobsterman Genevieve Kurilec holds a lobster caught while fishing along Deer Isle, Maine. Kurilec says more women are beginning to captain their own lobster boats., Lobsterman Genevieve Kurilec holds a lobster caught while fishing along Deer Isle, Maine. Kurilec says more women are beginning to captain their own lobster boats., In New England, more women are breaking through the glass gangway. That's the ramp you use to walk down onto a dock to hop onboard your own fishing boat. For generations lobstermen in Maine have been predominantly, well, men but that's starting to change., At a small gas dock in a rock-lined cove on Deer Isle, Maine, there's a new captain fueling up. Genevieve Kurilec, 29, wears a tank-top, orange fishing overalls and lobster buoy earrings., &ldquo; ... there's always been women fishermen in our area, you just see a lot more of it now., - Genevieve Kurilec, Kurilec's vessel, Hello Darling, is a small lobster boat. It has a standup center console with a steering wheel no roof or cabin for shade. The engine fires right up, and Kurilec is clearly happy to be heading out into the harbor., She still remembers the first day she came out here last year, as the captain of her own boat., It was the most exciting day of my life that I can remember in near times. It's something I worked towards for six years, Kurilec says. I was definitely nervous the first few times I came out. Luckily, I had a childhood friend that came out with me last year as my sternman. He made sure I was keeping it together. Now I love it., Accepting The Challenge, Kurilec calls herself a lobsterman, though she's a woman., The lobster fishing industry isn't necessarily always politically correct, she says., Kurilec grew up just east along the coast near Acadia National Park. When she was a kid, she wanted to be a marine biologist., After high school, she got into racing sailboats and spent time crewing on boats down in the Caribbean. She then came back to Maine and was working in boatyards and started becoming friends with more fishermen. When she was working at a boatyard in Blue Hill, a sternman needed someone to fill in., I was sitting in our local bar. One of the bigger fishermen from Stonington came in, and he bet me that I couldn't fish out of Stonington, Kurilec says. So I accepted the job and went with him for a year. It was a good job ... I enjoyed it a lot., Genevieve Kurilec pilots her boat, Hello Darling, near the coastal waters of Maine. Kurilec, 29, has worked on or around boats since graduating high school., Genevieve Kurilec pilots her boat, Hello Darling, near the coastal waters of Maine. Kurilec, 29, has worked on or around boats since graduating high school., Being a sternman is hard work. The captain on larger boats gets to drive, and is shaded from the sun. The sternman is out on the stern the back of the boat and has to haul up the traps and re-bait them. The traps are heavy, upward of 40 pounds. They're made of wire mesh, but have bricks or cement runners to keep them on the ocean floor., Guys that kind of teased me in the beginning are really supportive now. You know, I can break a big, 4-foot concrete trap over the rail just as well as anybody else, Kurilec says. Women tend to be faster with their hands. ... And we show up on time, we show up sober and we don't argue with the captain so much., Kurilec guides her boat over to one of her maroon-colored lobster buoys. Her electric power winch pulls the trap to the water's surface, then Kurilec lifts it onto the boat's rail., The ocean water in Maine is cold and clear, so even 30 feet down or so, Kurilec can see where the sand meets some rocks. That's where you want to set your trap., A Down Economy Brings Opportunity, Kurilec says when the recession hit five years ago, more women came into lobster fishing. She says the demand and price for lobsters fell. Instead of paying a sternman, some captains decided to keep the money in the family., I think it really gave a lot of women that chance. Your son probably has his own boat and is fishing somewhere, but your daughter's home and she's willing to go, she says. I really think it opened up a lot of opportunities. Keeping in mind there's always been women fishermen in our area, you just see a lot more of it now., This summer has been tough. The price of lobster has been down, but Kurilec is still happy she took the plunge., To me, every time I leave the dock, it's a little exciting, she says. I wouldn't want to be doing anything else today.
A customer using Safeway's personalized deals gets this loaf of bread for 99 cents instead of the original $4.29., A customer using Safeway's personalized deals gets this loaf of bread for 99 cents instead of the original $4.29., Loyalty cards have long given discounts to shoppers who sign up, but stores are increasingly offering personalized discounts tailored to each customer's shopping patterns., Those tailored discounts mean someone standing in front of you at the supermarket checkout line might get a lower price on the exact same gallon of milk that you're buying., A 'Secret Deal', Heather Kulper is one of those people who really wants to get a good deal. She's a mom in a suburb north of Seattle who writes a blog about coupon clipping and saving money., On a recent shopping trip to Safeway, Kulper pulls up a special Safeway app on her phone called Just For U. It shows her deeper discounts on products that she's likely to buy based on her shopping history. The deals are lower than the club card discount listed in the aisle. When she checks out, she gets that personalized sale price., This is the artisan caramelized onion bread, which is normally $4.29. Priced with the Safeway club card, it's $2.99, Kulper says. But with the Just For U personalized deal, it's 99 cents., To Keep Customers, Brick-And-Mortar Stores Look To Smartphones, Women's Car-Shopping Tactics Steer Them Toward Better Deals, Kulper says it feels a little bit like she's getting a secret deal., It's kind of like the old days, when you walked into a relative's small grocery store, and they gave you the family discount. Except now, this is a big corporation using computers to calculate exactly your propensity to buy and at what price., Encouraging Customer Loyalty, Firms are always interested in charging different customers different prices, says Paul Ellickson, who teaches economics and marketing at the University of Rochester., Ellickson says some people just don't notice price very much. They'll pay full price for what they want. That's profitable to supermarkets. What's even more profitable, however, is if supermarkets can offer a discount to the other folks, to nudge them into buying as well. Ellickson says we're already used to paying different prices for some things., Airline tickets are a good example if you buy very late, you expect to pay a fair amount. If you buy early, you expect to maybe pay less, he says. But when you're buying exactly the same product at exactly at the same point in time, and you and the person right next to you are paying different prices, you may get irritated with that., Of course, people have always gotten discounts with coupons. The difference here is that Safeway may offer one person the 99-cent deal on artisan bread, but maybe not you. Still, Safeway's president of marketing, Michael Minasi, says it's fair, because this program is open to everybody and you would get your own personalized deals. He says Safeway is trying to build loyalty., We think it helps them consolidate their purchasing with Safeway and spend more of their grocery dollars with us, Minasi says., The Price Point Of A Good Deal, Other stores are trying this, too. At a lot of Stop &amp; Shop stores on the East Coast, customers can pick up a scanner that they use as a kind of self-checkout while they shop. It also gives them personalized deals. Kroger mails individualized coupons to customers based on their shopping history., If they want to work that hard for it, then more power to them, says Safeway customer Romi Gordon., She says she doesn't mind if other people get personalized deals she just doesn't think it's worth her time. Shopper Keelan Lehmann says that to her, it doesn't seem right that different people are getting different prices., I just don't feel like it should be hidden, Lehmann says. I've never heard of it till you mentioned it ... I don't know, I don't like it., Back inside her local Safeway, Kulper is getting ready to check out. Back in May, she got a $50 gift card from Safeway to try out the personalized deal program. She says it's worked so well she switched from another store to shopping almost exclusively at Safeway., On this most recent trip, Kulper saved 41 percent with the Just for U app and coupons $21 altogether on her purchases. She says she's happy with her discount, and she doesn't mind that Safeway knows every tiny little detail of what groceries she buys. To Kulper, it's worth it, as long as she can save money.
The weak economy is helping to drive thousands more college graduates into the U.S. military., Since the recession began in 2007, there's been a steady increase in the number of college graduates joining the armed forces. The Navy and Army have seen the biggest jumps. About 60 percent more college grads joined the Navy last year than in 2007., For some of them, it's a job some would never have imagined for themselves just a few years ago., Not 'What I Thought I'd Be Doing', Louis Lam fits that bill. He's your typical good college student. He's on the dean's list at the University of Maryland, where he studies electrical engineering. He's active in campus organizations. To save money, he lives at home. He even helps his mom make dinner., Generally I would just get the dishes and stuff ready, Lam says as his mother drips sauce onto meat sizzling in a skillet., OK, maybe he's not helping with the actual cooking. Mom jokes there's a reason for that., He's not very good, Mydung Lam laughs. But Lam is a great son, she says., When his parents Tuy (center) and Mydung (right) Lam lost their jobs, electrical engineering major Louis Lam enlisted in the Navy., When his parents Tuy (center) and Mydung (right) Lam lost their jobs, electrical engineering major Louis Lam enlisted in the Navy., And that son's plans have changed drastically since he got to college., What I thought that I'd be doing, going into college as an electrical engineer, Lam says, I thought that I'd be working with gadgets, making robotic things, [tinkering with] groundbreaking technology., The idea of joining the military had never even crossed his mind, Lam says. But that was before both his parents lost their jobs. Unemployment benefits held them over for a while, but they ran out in April., I was like, I really need to get this job as soon as possible, Lam says. Otherwise, we might lose the house. We might have to sell some stuff., He saw his college friends struggling to find jobs or internships and says his family couldn't afford for him to go through that., Instead, he turned to the military. As the U.S. has struggled to recover from the worst recession since World War II, tens of thousands of other college students and graduates have made a similar choice., Bad Economy Drives Recruitment, When the economy worsens, as it has in recent years, we certainly see a surge in the number of young people who are highly qualified, who want to join the military, says Beth Asch, who researches military recruitment for the RAND Corp. It has studied U.S. military recruitment for more than 40 years., Asch says the surge in college graduates looks especially large this time around because of just how far the economy fell., Since the mid-2000s, the unemployment rate has essentially doubled, she says. And since then, the Army and Navy have seen a more than 50 percent rise in recruits with college degrees, according to their latest numbers., Asch says college graduates make up a relatively small portion of total recruits. But as long as the economy stays weak, their numbers will go up., Part of the reason is that it always pays to have a job with Uncle Sam., In order to sustain a volunteer force with high-quality people, the military finds it has to pay people more than they would get in the civilian world, Asch says., That gap has actually increased in recent years, in part because of the continuing rise of military pay and partly because the economy has stagnated, and so civilian pay has stagnated as well., More People Than Positions, At a naval-recruiting station near the University of Maryland, Lt. Mary Neal says it's almost easy right now for military recruiters., We have more people coming than we have positions for, she says. That's just how busy we are. It's sad when we actually have to tell them, 'Sorry, we've already met goal for this year.' , Neal says almost all the people being turned away have college degrees. She says the perks of a military job are especially appealing right now good pay, free health care, a tax-free housing allowance and a pay raise every year., Another recruiter at Neal's station pitched all that to Louis Lam before his parents' unemployment benefits ran out. He signed up and is in for five years., Working On Ships From Home, Lam says the recruiter also said he could stay close to home. He'll use his engineering background to work on nuclear reactors on submarines and ships, and he can do that from the D.C. area., While he finishes college this year, Lam says, the Navy will pay him about $50,000., That specifically was very important to me because of our financial situation, he says. I definitely wanted to say, 'Hey, is this what I'm going to be making? And if it is, then this is exactly what I need right now.' , Lam says the checks started coming a few months ago, and he's been spending most of them on his parents' mortgage and his student loans. For now, he's giving up the goal he had before he got to college: a career in the private sector with a big-name company., Lam says he's OK with that. There's a much better payout for helping his family and serving his country.
Benjamin Lawsky, superintendent of New York state's Department of Financial Services, got British bank Standard Chartered to pay a $340 million settlement over allegations that it schemed with the Iranian government to launder billions of dollars., Benjamin Lawsky, superintendent of New York state's Department of Financial Services, got British bank Standard Chartered to pay a $340 million settlement over allegations that it schemed with the Iranian government to launder billions of dollars., Banking industry officials say it's unheard of: A state regulator, flying solo, threatens to take away the state license of a global bank and then secures a very public settlement., That's exactly what happened in New York this past week, when the state's Department of Financial Services reached a settlement with Britain's Standard Chartered Bank over allegations that it schemed with the Iranian government to launder billions of dollars., So who is the man who dared to leapfrog over federal regulators? He's Benjamin Lawsky, the 42-year-old who was appointed less than a year ago to the newly formed state agency by Gov. Andrew Cuomo., State Steps Out, Ahead Of The Fed, Lawksy and the agency moved forward without federal regulators, who had also reportedly been reviewing similar allegations. Karen Shaw Petrou at Federal Financial Analytics says it's a shock that foreign bankers are still absorbing., Many of them had not taken the ability of New York state to be a meaningful or even a very aggressive regulator as seriously as they should have, Petrou says. They got one heck of a wake-up call., Standard Chartered agreed to pay the state of New York a $340 million fine. The state said the bank allegedly conducted 60,000 transactions for Iran that left the U.S. vulnerable to terrorists and drug kingpins., Harvard Law Professor Hal Scott says state regulators traditionally act as a backstop to federal regulators on these types of allegations, but not this time., What might have been regrettable here is that once the state authorities got onto this, they seemed to keep the federal authorities out of the loop, Scott says., A Man From The Southern District, Lawsky's friends, such as Neil Barofsky, a senior fellow at NYU Law School, say his character was shaped as an assistant U.S. attorney in New York's Southern District. The district was known as an island of independence, separate from the mother ship, the U.S. Department of Justice., There was never any shame in losing a case in the Southern District, Barofsky says. The only shame that would come is from not being aggressive and not trying to do the right thing., Federal Judge Jed Rakoff, known for his independent orders and opinions from the bench, is also a product of the Southern District. He takes the characterization a step further., Down in Washington, with a mixture of envy and sarcasm, they refer to it as the sovereign district of New York, Rakoff says., It is exactly the type of place where a young prosecutor could cultivate a strong backbone, but some bankers have labeled Lawsky a rogue regulator. Chip MacDonald, a managing partner in financial services with Jones Day, says New York should have held off., I think they acted prematurely, MacDonald says. It would be more helpful to both the public financial stability and international relationships for them to come to a conclusion at the same time., A Win For New York's Governor, For better or worse, New York regulators and prosecutors have a long history of independent action that often catapults them to the national political stage., Stu Loeser, who until last week was New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg's longest serving press officer, says the settlement with Standard Chartered Bank is a political coup, not so much for Lawsky but for New York's Gov. Cuomo., The governor is the one who elevated him; the governor is the one who did what Washington has failed to do, Loeser says., Cuomo's aspirations for political office are well-known, and this action might help solidify his reputation., There's no doubt, however, that the bank settlement also helps the people of New York by adding millions of dollars into a general fund that could use the money.
Monday, New York comedian Matt Fisher wrote a very serious blog post headlined My Sister Paid Progressive Insurance to Defend Her Killer In Court., It quickly drew considerable attention on the Web, bad publicity for Progresssive Insurance and coverage from national news outlets because he laid out a sad story:, &mdash; His sister Katie was killed in a Baltimore car accident on June 19, 2010., &mdash; The other driver's insurance company looked at the situation and settled with my sister's estate basically immediately., &mdash; But because that other driver was underinsured, Katie's insurance company was now on the hook for the difference [about $75,000] between the other guy's insurance and the value of Katie's policy., &mdash; That company, Progressive Insurance, Fisher wrote, refused to pay the policy to my sister's estate., &mdash; His parents had to go to court to prove the other driver's negligence. And during that trial, attorneys for Progressive basically ended up on the opposite side from Katie's estate. Hence the title of Fisher's blog post., Tuesday, Progressive posted a statement saying it did not serve as the attorney for the defendant in this case. He was defended by his insurance company, Nationwide., To which Fisher responded that:, At the beginning of the trial on Monday, August 6th, an attorney identified himself as Jeffrey R. Moffat and stated that he worked for Progressive Advanced Insurance Company. He then sat next to the defendant [the other driver]. During the trial, both in and out of the courtroom, he conferred with the defendant. He gave an opening statement to the jury, in which he proposed the idea that the defendant should not be found negligent in the case. He cross-examined the plaintiff's witnesses. On direct examination, he questioned all of the defense's witnesses. He made objections on behalf of the defendant, and he was a party to the argument of all of the objections heard in the case. After all of the witnesses had been called, he stood before the jury and gave a closing argument, in which he argued that my sister was responsible for the accident that killed her, and that the jury should not decide that the defendant was negligent., Thursday, Progressive announced that an agreement has been reached with the Fisher family to settle the claim. It added that:, Under Maryland law, in order to receive the benefits of an underinsured driver claim, the other driver must be at fault. Sometimes this can be proven without the need for a trial, but in Ms. Fisher's case, there were credible conflicting eyewitness accounts as to who was at fault. A trial was necessary so that a jury could review all of the evidence and come to a decision. ... As a defendant in this case, Progressive participated in the trial procedures on our own behalf while Nationwide represented the other driver., Today, Fisher and those who knew Katie are tweeting about her: #KatieFisher. Here's one of his from Thursday that sounds like something one loving sibling would say about another: #KatieFisher was mean to all of my girlfriends except for @DanaM42, who went on to become my wife., As he told The Associated Press, the thing I would like more than anything to be talking about is how much I loved my sister., Update at 11:15 a.m. ET: NBC News' Red Tape Chronicles blog says that the lessons from [the] Progressive screw up are that when it's Twitter vs. lawyers, take Twitter.
Families often pull together to help finance a college education, with parents and grandparents chipping in or co-signing loans. And now, a SmartMoney report finds the U.S. government withholding money from Social Security recipients who've stopped paying on federal student loans., And it's an increasingly common event, as AnnaMaria Andriotis, a senior writer at SmartMoney, tells Morning Edition co-host Renee Montagne. Much of the debt stems from federal PLUS loans, taken out by older family members to help students., On a spike in activity, In about 12 years, we've gone from just six cases [of Social Security benefits being cut] to 115,000 and counting because this year isn't even over yet. What we're seeing is that student loan debt is following people later on into life., On lingering student loans, This is really the only consumer loan out there that people cannot get rid of. ... In pretty much all of these cases, these are federal student loans that these retirees signed up for, by themselves. There is no co-signer involved., Aren't even their own loans, In other cases, you have retirees who are still dealing with their own student loan debt the student loans they incurred to go to college, decades ago. ... But in most cases, these loans aren't even their own loans. And that's what makes this whole situation really sad., On how much is taken from retirees, The amount varies, but it can run up to 15 percent of each month's check. So when you look at the average monthly Social Security benefit that's about $1,200 that means a monthly haircut of about $190. So, it's not a small amount of money. And especially for a retiree on a fixed income, this sort of situation can really derail their retirement.
Weekly rates, in percent, for fixed 30-year mortgages, Source: Freddie Mac, Credit: NPR, Refinance activity continues to boom, fueling the home-loan market. Low interest rates have created a class of serial refinancers those lucky enough to borrow at lower rates and given them new opportunities to spend their freed up cash., Settlement attorney Robert Gratz never used to be on a first-name basis with his clients., In the past, our practice was such that you'd see people, and that was the end of it, he says., Gratz now sees the same faces all the time, of clients refinancing again and again these days in the mid-3 percent range., At one point, we used to joke it's almost like going to the dentist, he says. There are people that we see almost every year when rates were dropping. But now that they've locked in, I think we're done., Gratz himself refinanced his house in Maryland about six times. You could say it's one of the benefits or hazards of the job., You're sitting across the table from people at a closing looking at their interests, and then mentally saying, 'Hmm, mine's higher,' he says., Not Everyone Qualifies, Refinancing is not available to everyone. There are millions who don't qualify: Homeowners with bad credit or who are underwater, owing more than their homes are worth, cannot do so. But those who can, switch from adjustable- to fixed-rate mortgages, locking money in at rates their parents in the 1980s never dreamed of. Gratz says many clients shave a couple of hundred dollars off their monthly mortgage payment; some get an even bigger windfall., The money goes somewhere, either toward savings or spending, and certainly both of those are good for the economy, he says., The Mortgage Bankers Association expects nearly $1 trillion worth of home loans will be refinanced this year an 8.6 percent increase over last year. The greatest annual increases are in areas hard hit by the housing crisis: Nevada, Michigan, Florida and Arizona. Revamped government programs are making it easier to refinance., Shelley Hall, who lives in Brea, Calif., has refinanced four times. But she says she's careful about bringing up the subject., I don't mention refinancing to some of my friends, because if they bought in the last couple of years, they're either underwater or they just don't have enough equity to do it, she says., Hall says she tires of the process all that finding, printing and signing of documents. There's also the gamesmanship of trying to time the market just so like she did when she refinanced in April., They had been a tenth of a point lower the week before, and I tried not to kick myself for more than a few seconds over that, she says. 'Cause, you know, it's human nature., Hall's mortgage has gone from $2,000 to $1,500 a month., I think at 3.75, I think we're done, she says., The extra money she's saving is going toward retirement and, she says, her family is considering buying another house and renting out their current one., Changing Neighborhoods, Refis, as they're known, have changed the face of Ellen Sandler's Chevy Chase, Md., neighborhood. Over the years, savings enabled Sandler to double the size of her house and remodel it a few times., I have neighbors who are also doubling the size of their house, she says., Sandler started out decades ago paying nearly 13 percent interest, but recently refinanced, yet again, at a 2.75 percent rate., Each time I refi'd I was sure it wouldn't get lower. And don't forget, when you start with double-digit numbers, you become accustomed to that, she says. And then all of a sudden, 9 becomes a wonderful rate. And things got to 7, everyone was sitting there saying they can't possibly go lower., Sandler, a real estate agent, doesn't think the reverse might also be true that homeowners who've gotten cheap rates won't buy or sell houses again when rates eventually rise because people still have to make choices that require moves. But right now, she says, those who can are enjoying the cheap money.
Hondo (left) and Dizz., For more: Why does the government subsidize crop insurance in the first place? We try to answer that question in our latest podcast., The federal government spends about $7 billion a year on crop insurance for U.S. farmers. Policies are sold by private companies, but the government sets the rates, so the companies can't compete on price., That means the guys who sell crop insurance have to find other ways to compete. They try to out-nice each other. They are very charming. They wear polo shirts depicting hobbies. They have fun nicknames. And they know everyone in town., Don Dizz Biefelt is the most interested, friendly neighbor you can imagine. He's 82 years old, and he sells crop insurance in Anchor Illinois., I sat with him on Anchor's one public bench. His customers were everywhere. That guy over there, working on a truck he's a customer. (And, by the way, the customer's wife just had a gallbladder out, Dizz says.) The guy in that house over there is another customer, as is the guy down at the end. Dizz knows their mothers, their nicknames, their wives' digestion problems., But Don has competition. Brent Hondo Honneger works a few miles down the road. Brent also wears polo shirts and is charming and knows everyone., The morning I meet Brent he has organized a Q&A; session for farmers on how to file a crop insurance claim. Brent invited a bunch of Don's clients to this event. Just in case, he says, they're not getting all their questions answered., Then he makes sure to stand by the door and personally greet each farmer:, There's one customer who Brent has been trying to poach from Don he's been trying to poach from Don for decades. But he's like, 'I go to church with Don. I see him every Sunday.', Brent says he is always gracious. But he'll occasionally ask Don's customers a few questions about whether Don is keeping up with the times. Does he mail everything still? Brent will ask. He's still operating like we operated 20 years ago., Government subsidies for crop insurance have set the stage for thousands of tiny popularity contests in small farming communities all across the country., Right now, in the worst drought since 1956, most farmers have generous insurance coverage, and I can confidently report they're getting very good service., For more: Why does the government subsidize crop insurance in the first place? We try to answer that question in our latest podcast.
A powerful love potion for sale on eBay. The buy it now price is $21., A powerful love potion for sale on eBay. The buy it now price is $21., It's a tough day for the Harry Potters among us: Ebay said today that beginning in September it will no longer allow the sale of some, um, metaphysical products., Among them: advice, spells, curses, hexing, conjuring, magic, prayers, blessing services, magic potions and healing sessions., The Los Angeles reports:, EBay said in an email that it regularly reviews categories and updates policies based on customer feedback and was 'discontinuing a small number of categories within the larger Metaphysical subcategory.', Spokeswoman Johnna Hoff said that buyers and sellers have complained to EBay that such transactions 'often result in issues that can be difficult to resolve.', 'It's important to note that items that have a tangible value for the item itself and may also be used in metaphysical rites and practices (ie jewelry, crystals, incense, candles, and books) are allowed in most cases,' Hoff wrote., Ebay is one of the largest auction sites on the Internet.
An illustration of an Apple iPhone displaying the Facebook app's splash screen in front of the login page., An illustration of an Apple iPhone displaying the Facebook app's splash screen in front of the login page., At one point today, Facebook's stock price sunk to a new low. At about $19.69, it was worth about half of what it was initially sold for in May., Bloomberg explains that what is happening is that early investors in the company including founder and CEO Mark Zuckerberg were allowed to sell some of their stocks for the first time today., Bloomberg adds:, The prospect of more stock sales means Facebook will need to work even harder to convince investors that it deserves a higher price, relative to earnings, than all of its U.S.-based competitors, except for LinkedIn Corp. (LNKD) The shares freed up today make up only 14 percent of the 1.91 billion that will be available for sales in the coming nine months., 'Buckle your seatbelts for the next couple of months until they make it through all these shares coming unlocked,' said Tom Forte, an analyst at Telsey Advisory Group in New York., Early Facebook investors such as DST Global Ltd., Goldman Sachs Group Inc. (GS), Elevation Partners and Accel Partnerscan start selling part of their holdings today, Menlo Park, California-based Facebook has said in filings. That's after the lifting of restrictions, set with underwriters, that are designed to prevent a flood of shares immediately after an IPO., USA Today says that the price drop may not necessarily mean that the insiders are unloading stocks. It could be, explains the paper, that other investors sold expecting the insiders to sell., It's been a rough run for Facebook, reports USA Today. After one of the most-anticipated IPOs in history, Facebook suffered what may be the most-botched public offering as trading glitches marred its first day. It's been almost all downhill for the Menlo Park., Calif., company since then., For a graphical look at Facebook's performance, Yahoo! has a historical chart.
Credit: Maggie Starbard, Benjamin Morris, Ben de la Cruz, The know your farmer concept may soon apply to the folks growing your coffee, too., Increasingly, specialty roasters are working directly with coffee growers around the world to produce coffees as varied in taste as wines. And how are roasters teaching their clientele to appreciate the subtle characteristics of brews? By bringing an age-old tasting ritual once limited to coffee insiders to the coffee-sipping masses., When we wanted to get in on the coffee cupping trend, we headed to Artifact Coffee, a funky new cafe in Baltimore. It was started by Spike Gjerde of Baltimore's Woodberry Kitchen, who is doing with coffee what he's doing with food in his restaurants: sourcing it from small-scale farmers who are committed to sustainability and quality., If you listen to my story on All Things Considered, you'll hear that Artifact is serving CounterCulture Coffee. This trend-setting, North-Carolina-based roaster has forged relationships with coffee growers all over the world. For instance, it's working with Jorge and Javier Recinos, fourth-generation farmers who run one of the first organic coffee farms in Guatemala., Peter Giuliano of CounterCulture says creating that one-on-one relationship with growers has led to better coffee. The Recinos brothers had been selling their beans in bulk, but Giuliano worked with them to differentiate the best beans., We came in and said, 'No, no, no, we want to separate the coffee and pay more for the better stuff,' he says., He says his customers are clamoring for the premium stuff wherever it's served. Like Intelligentsia, another specialty roaster with a similar approach, CounterCulture sells its coffees both online and wholesale to coffee shops. From Atlanta where chefs Hugh Acheson and Ryan Smith of Empire State South are introducing customers to CounterCulture's specialty coffee to Des Moines, where the Mars Caf serves up Intelligentsia's brews, the new wave of coffee is spreading., Which brings us back to cuppings, where baristas try to help newbies discern the subtle flavors and characteristics of various coffees., Baristas are like the sommeliers of their industry, explains Artifact Coffee's Gjerde. And he says he thinks more coffee drinkers will start to appreciate coffee for its individual characteristics, as we do wine., This artisanal approach is changing the way people think about coffee from this anonymous commodity to something that's personal, direct and special, says CounterCulture's Giuliano. In a new venture with the Specialty Coffee Association, Giuliano says he's planning a symposium that he describes as his industry's equivalent of the Aspen Ideas Festival., So, if you'd like to be a connoisseur of coffee, start studying the roasting bags. Increasingly, there's as much information as you'd find on a wine label., The most recent bag I bought, freshly roasted Stumptown coffee, came with a little tasting card. Online, I can see the exact coordinates of the location of the farm it came from, as well as the elevation (as I explain in my radio story, altitude influences taste), and the varietal of coffee. Happy sipping.
There were 366,000 first-time claims for unemployment insurance last week, up by 2,000 from the week before, the Employment and Training Administration says., So what we said last week applies again:, Claims have stayed in a range between 350,000 and 400,000 all year. The unemployment rate, meanwhile, has also varied little: it's low this year has been 8.1 percent and the high has been 8.3 percent., Meanwhile, there's another sign that the housing market is on the mend. The Census Bureau and Department of Housing and Urban Development say that while there was a 1.1 percent declinee in housing starts in July from June, construction starts were up 21.5 percent from the July 2011 pace.
Sara Millan (left) thanks Neighborhood Assistance Corporation of America CEO Bruce Marks after NACA was able to reduce her family's mortgage during an event in Los Angeles in September 2010., Sara Millan (left) thanks Neighborhood Assistance Corporation of America CEO Bruce Marks after NACA was able to reduce her family's mortgage during an event in Los Angeles in September 2010., Over the past four years, Bruce Marks has been on a traveling road show to help people avoid foreclosure. His nonprofit, the Neighborhood Assistance Corporation of America, has held more than 80 events in cities around the country. So far, Marks says, NACA has helped 202,000 people get their payments lowered so they can afford to keep their homes., The banks now reach out to their borrowers, to their customers, to come to the NACA Save the Dream events so they're doing that because it makes business sense for them, Marks says., He says he has figured out how to get this broken system to work better. In each city, he rents out a big convention center. All the big banks Wells Fargo, Bank of America, JPMorgan Chase send teams of people, sometimes several hundred bank employees altogether. They can approve loan modifications on the spot for homeowners who show up and qualify., 'It's Not Easy', It's not easy, you know; it's very, very hard because you work and you know you're trying to make ends meet and trying to get a place for your kids, says Rebecca Asare, an immigrant from Ghana who attended a recent NACA tour event in Worcester, Mass., In 2009, Asare was working as a technician at a medical device company. But she says the work got outsourced to China. So there was a layoff and a lot of us had to go home, she says. So [it became a struggle] with my mortgage because I'm a single mom here; my husband is in Africa., Asare has since managed to go back to school and get a job as a nursing assistant. She has a decent income and wants to find a way to keep her house., But Marks says that banks too often foreclose, even in cases where it clearly makes sense to keep people in their home and paying their mortgage at a lower interest rate. Sometimes it's for seemingly crazy reasons like they're missing a tax document that they already faxed in three times., This is the most dysfunctional industry in the world, Marks says., Building His Own System, The banks disagree, but they admit that their systems were not prepared to handle the scale of the foreclosure crisis., Four years ago, Marks decided that if the banks' computer systems and call centers were all tangled up and not built to handle the problem, he would build his own system., We learned what didn't work, he says. We kept failing at various things, so then what we learned is we had to go outside of the banks. We had to set up our own systems outside of the way that they do business. In essence we had to do the work for them, and that's what we do., NACA counselors help homeowners scan all their documents tax forms, identification, bank statements into a computer system that the nonprofit developed. If they're missing any papers, they can go home and get them. And NACA organizes all this into an online package for the banks., When Marks first told the nation's biggest banks he wanted them to patch into his computer system, he says, they said, 'Never we don't do that because this is Bank of America, this is Chase, this is Wells [Fargo]. We have our own systems.' , Putting Pressure On Bank CEOs, But Marks does a pretty good angry bulldog imitation. And when the banks would say no to things like this, he'd round up hundreds of homeowners to protest at the banks' headquarters even at some CEOs' houses and country clubs., At one point, in 2009, Marks was targeting JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon, whose house is on the edge of a lake. We were going to bring hundreds of people on rafts, going over water to do a beach landing on his property, Marks says., That protest never actually happened. After Marks started buying up landing rafts for this flotilla, Chase got wind of this. And Marks says the bank agreed to take part in his Save the Dream tours. Marks says Chase has since been a good partner. The bank had no comment., But while the banks seem to be playing ball with Marks now, sometimes his aggressive style creates conflicts with people you might think would be his friends. During his road shows he has had some turf battles with local housing nonprofits. But the show goes on., When a homeowner gets approved for help in the Bank of America area, bank employees actually wave plastic clapper noisemakers and ring a gong., A Positive Answer, Then Relief And Joy, Homeowner Asare sat with mortgage specialist Deanzala Johnson, who told her she qualified to keep her house with a modified and affordable mortgage payment. Asare was overjoyed and called her 12-year-old daughter to share the news that they could stay in their home., My daughter says, 'Mommy, can you fix my room back again for me because you pack all the stuff,' Asare says., Asare had been so worried about getting foreclosed on that for months her kids had been living out of suitcases, which had been packed in case they had to move., But now Asare has a clean slate and can keep her house. If she stays current, Bank of America will pay NACA for negotiating a successful outcome, and that helps fund these events., Of course, not every homeowner has enough income to qualify. We can't make everyone happy, Johnson says. That's just basically it. ... We try our best to do what we can as far as we can go., But for those who do get a loan modification, Marks estimates that more than 90 percent of homeowners keep making their payments after a year., This week, the group starts two more Save the Dream events one on Long Island, N.Y., and the other in St. Louis.
Horace Nye Nursing Home in Elizabethtown, N.Y., was sold in June, part of a wave of privatizations in rural counties across New York state., Horace Nye Nursing Home in Elizabethtown, N.Y., was sold in June, part of a wave of privatizations in rural counties across New York state., The national recession may be over, but local governments around the country are still hurting. Core services and programs are being scaled back, cut or privatized. In Upstate New York, county officials are scrambling to sell off nursing homes that have been taxpayer-funded for generations., Horace Nye Nursing Home in Elizabethtown, N.Y., a modest brick building that sits a stone's throw from the village square, has 100 beds, and that's how many elderly people live here. There is always a waiting list., The home was established by Essex County in 1832, when this village in the Adirondack Mountains was a frontier mining and logging town., It was a place of last resort for people too old, too infirm and too poor to care for themselves., But earlier this summer, county supervisors including Sue Montgomery Corey voted to sell the home to a private company based in the Bronx., &ldquo; I think we are really at a point, because of the financial condition of government in general, of really having to make some tough choices., - Sue Montgomery Corey, Essex County Board of Supervisors member, I think we are really at a point, because of the financial condition of government in general, of really having to make some tough choices, Montgomery Corey says., Horace Nye loses a ton of money. State and federal agencies have refused to boost Medicaid payments for poor residents, which means Essex County taxpayers have been forced to chip in $2 million a year to keep the place running., Montgomery Corey says a corporation can operate more efficiently and can pay for things that cash-strapped Essex County just can't afford, like training for staff and new equipment. The company will also hire workers for significantly less than the county paid its employees. But some county leaders say the belt tightening has gone too far., There's some services that government is morally obligated to provide, says Tom Scozzafava, another member of the Essex County Board of Supervisors. Despite the flood of red ink, he voted against the sale. I think services for our elderly population is critical, especially in a county as rural as Essex County., Local Squeeze, This kind of debate is happening all over the U.S., It's not always nursing homes. Nationwide, governments run only about 7 percent of senior homes, so in some places it's cuts to police departments or nutrition programs or public transportation., Local officials are asking big questions about what their core mission should be and how they should pay for it in the post-recession world., Larry Eichel is a researcher with Pew's American Cities Project, which released a study in June called The Local Squeeze., Revenues for local governments are going down. Demands for local services are going up. That's the squeeze. The economy may be recovering, but a lot of local governments, the revenues aren't recovering or they're recovering very slowly, Eichel says., &ldquo; There's some services that government is morally obligated to provide. , - Tom Scozzafava, Essex County Board of Supervisors member, In New York, that squeeze got worse last year when the state passed a new cap on local property taxes. Some local governments here are on the brink of insolvency. At least 10 county-run nursing homes have already been sold, and county officials say they expect another dozen to be privatized in New York in the next couple of years., But critics say it's unclear what will happen if some of these private companies go out of business, or stop taking residents who rely on Medicaid., Private picks and chooses who they keep and who they take, says Shawna Barber, who has been a nurse and county employee at Horace Nye for 19 years. And what about the rest of our county residents that's going to need it someday? And what about our people who are here now that are on Medicaid?, It's scary, she says. I'm just afraid that if they get sick and have to go to a hospital, there won't be a bed there to come back to., Especially in rural areas like Essex County, that would mean families would be forced to care for elderly loved ones at home, Barber says, or to drive long distances to find nursing home care in the nearest city., Centers for Specialty Care, the company that agreed to pay $4 million for Horace Nye, has been buying up government-owned nursing homes across rural New York. It's currently negotiating to buy another home in nearby Washington County. The company refused repeated requests from NPR for an interview., But the day before Horace Nye was sold this summer, another private nursing home nearby announced that it will sharply cut the number of beds available to low-income seniors who rely on Medicaid.
The world is going to hell, and prices are going through the roof. This, more or less, seems to be the perpetual conventional wisdom., The first half of the statement is debatable. But the second half is clearly wrong at the moment: Prices are not going through the roof., Prices for U.S. consumers rose by just 1.4 percent over the past year, according to the consumer price index numbers released this morning. In other words, inflation is very low., If this comes as a surprise, don't be surprised. In study after study, in country after country, economists have found that consumers overestimate inflation., It's not clear why this is the case., Maybe it's because when consumers think about inflation, they think about stuff they buy all the time stuff like groceries and gasoline. But gas accounts for only 5 percent of the average household's budget, while groceries make up 9 percent., And over the past few decades, prices for more expensive things that people buy less often stuff like cars, furniture and electronics have risen more slowly than prices for stuff people buy all the time. As a result, consumers have tended to over-estimate inflation. (For more on this hypothesis, see this study.), There's also this: Everybody talks about food and gas prices when they're rising. Think of gas prices in the past few weeks, and earlier this year. But, somehow, we don't hear so much about gas prices falling, as they did for much of the spring., People focus on bad news more than they focus on good news, Paul J. Healy, an Ohio State University economist who has studied how people perceive inflation, told me. When prices go up, they notice it. When prices go down, they don't care.
There was no change in the consumer price index last month, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reports., It's the second month in a row that the index was flat a sign that inflation remained in check for the first half or so of summer. Whether that trend will continue, however, is uncertain., A still sluggish economy should continue help hold down inflation. But in recent weeks the price of gasoline has been on the rise. And the drought that has a grip on much of the nation's farm regions is likely to push food prices higher in coming months., For the 12 months ending in July, prices were up just 1.4 percent.
ABC News President Ben Sherwood (from left), Univision Networks President Cesar Conde and Univision News President Isaac Lee announced the joint venture between ABC News and Univision on May 7 in New York., This is the third in a three-part series about major American networks trying to appeal to a broader Latino audience., Jorge Ramos has a humbling problem., He is one of the best-known Hispanics in the U.S. and a respected news anchor for the Univision networks on which millions of Americans routinely rely., And yet, in Ramos' telling, his 14-year-old son, Nicolas, and his 25-year-old daughter, Paola, don't watch his newscasts., They get their information in English, Ramos said. Their friends don't watch me. Their generation is not watching us in Spanish. So we have to do something., That something is a new cable news channel, so embryonic that there is no name yet, or a clear sensibility. But it does offer a twist for Univision and Ramos: It's in English., Univision has been operating for five decades and already commands about three-quarters of the Spanish-speaking television audience in the U.S. across its various broadcast and cable channels, according to Nielsen ratings estimates. On many nights, its ratings beat the major English-language networks. Now it is joining with ABC News to map out an entirely new network to reach Hispanics who prefer English., This is a fascinating point in our country's history right now, says Cesar Conde, president of Univision networks., NBC News is attempting to collaborate as never before with its sister Spanish-language network Telemundo. MundoFox, a Spanish-language network born of a partnership between News Corp.'s Fox International Channels and a Colombian network, made its formal debut this week., But this joint venture between Univision and ABC is in some ways the most notable effort by any major media outlet to try to capture a greater Hispanic audience at a time when the Hispanic share of the U.S. population is markedly growing., Increasingly, we're seeing the influence of Latinos across all fronts in America, from cultural to social, political and of course economic fronts. And that has a number of repercussions, Conde says. One of the areas that has been underserved is providing a culturally relevant offering for Hispanics in English to complement everything that we're doing on the Spanish-language front., Conde calls this effort uncharted territory, and ABC decidedly wants to stake its claim. That means a shift in the network's newsroom culture. One notable piece of evidence of that change: Starting this month, all ABC News staffers are being offered free Spanish lessons., ABC News President Ben Sherwood met with Conde and other Univision executives early last year in anticipation of the 2012 presidential campaign coverage. The partnership started modestly., They wondered if Jorge Ramos could participate in some way in an ABC News debate, Sherwood recalls. The answer to that was, 'Sure, no problem.' , Bigger plans soon beckoned. Sherwood notes Univision's announcements that it intended to create a series of cable networks, involving news, entertainment and sport, to complement its cluster of existing channels., Our idea was let's build the channel of the future aimed at English-speaking Hispanics with culturally relevant programming, Sherwood says. It's as simple and as bold as that., Officials at the two networks say the formula, still evolving, will incorporate lifestyle programming as well, focusing on entertainment, food, health, music and pop culture., While Univision executives and journalists laud ABC's traditions in news, Sherwood notes that his network brings an additional element: negotiating muscle. Industry officials say Disney, ABC's parent company, can leverage the indispensability of some of its other cable properties, such as the ESPN networks, to help convince cable and satellite television providers to carry the new station., Millions of Americans rely on Univision anchor Jorge Ramos to tell them about the news, but his children aren't among them. Like many Latinos who've grown up in the U.S., they get their news in English., Millions of Americans rely on Univision anchor Jorge Ramos to tell them about the news, but his children aren't among them. Like many Latinos who've grown up in the U.S., they get their news in English., For ABC, the appeal of working closely with Univision on this project is readily apparent. All three legacy broadcast network divisions lag in attracting Hispanic viewers for their newscasts, even as roughly one in six Americans is Latino. That share is expected to rise, as Hispanics accounted for more than half of the growth of the U.S. population between 2000 and 2010., Mark Hugo Lopez, associate director of the Pew Hispanic Center, says as immigration to the U.S. from Mexico has slowed, most of that growth occurred among American-born Latinos. They are comfortable moving between media in both languages, he says, or may largely speak English when among friends. , I think that's what the Univision/ABC News [network] is looking to exploit, Lopez says., The logic is strong, but the strategy carries its own risks. English-speaking Latinos turn to the same news sources as everyone else, such as existing cable news stations, big newspapers, Yahoo, Twitter and Facebook., But Spanish-language outlets give greater coverage to stories that affect Latinos directly, including voting rights, immigration and developments in Latin America and the Caribbean., Lopez points to a 2010 study by the Pew Hispanic Center that found Hispanics who relied on English-language media outlets did not understand nearly as much about that year's census as those who depended on Spanish-language news organizations. English-speaking Latinos, for example, were less likely to realize that authorities could not use the answers provided in the census questionnaires to deport people who are in this country illegally, Lopez said., They identify as Hispanic. They call themselves Hispanic, Lopez says, but they aren't necessarily getting the same sort of news coverage directed specifically to them about being Latino, or about what it means to be Latino., He says the evidence just doesn't exist yet to prove that the ABC/Univision channel will be a winning concept. The network is expected to first appear on the air sometime in the second quarter of next year. The accompanying English-language website, however, is supposed to make its first appearance sometime this fall., Ramos says people who prefer English will encounter fuller coverage of issues that affect them in the language in which they're most comfortable., Those voices that we hear on a daily basis in Spanish are not being heard in English, Ramos says. It's time that that starts to happen.
Britain's fifth-largest bank has agreed to pay $340 million to settle charges by New York regulators that it laundered money for Iranian clients., NPR's Chris Arnold filed this report for our Newscast unit:, In court documents, the regulator alleged that for 10 years Standard Chartered Bank quote 'schemed with the Government of Iran and hid from regulators roughly 60,000 secret transactions... involving $250 billion dollars and reaping hundreds of millions of dollars in fees for the bank.', The money flowed through the New York branch of the British bank. Under U.S. law, any money transfers coming from the Iranian banks involved must be subjected to regulatory scrutiny. Some transactions can be rejected for security reasons. So the British bank allegedly falsified documents to hide the source of the money., Now, that the New York's superintendent of Financial Services Benjamin Lawsky has reached a settlement the British bank will install a monitor., The New York Times reports that this is a big win for New York's Department of Financial Services, which was just formed last year.
President Obama and Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack (second from right) inspect drought-damaged corn on the McIntosh farm in Missouri Valley, Iowa., President Obama and Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack (second from right) inspect drought-damaged corn on the McIntosh farm in Missouri Valley, Iowa., You've all heard a lot about this year's devastating drought in the Midwest, right? The U.S. Department of Agriculture announced last Friday that the average U.S. cornfield this year will yield less per acre than it has since 1995. Soybean yields are down, too., So you'd think that farmers who grow these crops must be really hurting. And that's certainly the impression you get from media reports. Nick Guetterman, president of the Johnson County Farm Bureau in eastern Kansas, tells The New York Times: You take what you get, that's all you can do. You go to church and pray., But how's this for a surprising fact? On average, corn growers actually will rake in a record amount of cash from their harvest this year. And that's not even counting the payments that many of them will receive from their crop insurance., Why? It's simple. Because of the drought, supply is down and the price of corn has gone sky-high. So even a reduced harvest is worth more. And alongside the farmers who have lost their crop completely, there are others farmers in Idaho with irrigation, for instance, or farmers in well-watered central Minnesota or Mississippi who will make out like bandits., Take a look at the numbers, below. They come from USDA historical data and from projections for 2012 that came out last Friday., Notes: * projected, Source: USDA, Believe me, these were all really good years for corn farming, much better than, say, the 1990s, when corn prices were mostly down in the $2-a-bushel range, and yields were lower, too. The yield in 2009 stands as the all-time record., Yet 2012, this devastating drought year, is likely to beat them all, at least when it comes to the amount of money that farmers will reap from an average acre of corn. The situation with soybeans is similar, but there's less money at stake., Now, it's worth remembering that this average masks a huge amount of variation. Some crop growers those in hard-hit areas without irrigation or crop insurance really could be ruined. Others, who are probably banging themselves on the head right now, won't ever see these high prices because they sold their crop back in the spring, when no one saw the drought coming., Also, as we've reported earlier, there will be a lot of pain among those who need to buy this expensive crop of corn and soybeans. These include chicken, pork, dairy and beef producers., But the next time you see a story about farmers suffering in the drought, just remember: There are winners and losers when food becomes scarce, and farmers are on both sides.
House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan, R-Wis., shakes hands with Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke at the close of the committee's hearing on the state of the economy in February 2011., House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan, R-Wis., shakes hands with Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke at the close of the committee's hearing on the state of the economy in February 2011., Mitt Romney's new running mate has authored some provocative policy proposals to cut budget deficits and overhaul Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid. But Rep. Paul Ryan has also been an advocate for a different course for the central banking system of the United States, the Federal Reserve., For the past 35 years, the Fed has had a dual mandate from Congress: to set interest rates at levels that will both foster maximum employment and keep prices stable. Put another way, the Fed's goals are to get unemployment as low as possible while keeping inflation in check., Paul Ryan, however, wants to change that. He wants the Fed to stop trying to manage the unemployment rate and focus like a laser on just one goal: stable prices., At a hearing on Capitol Hill earlier this year, Ryan told Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke that he thought the central bank's focus on employment was a distraction from its effort to fight inflation., The result of this balanced approach is that higher-than-preferred inflation may be tolerated; not that it's desired, but that it will be tolerated, Ryan said., Quoting former Fed Chairman Paul Volcker, Ryan said that central bankers who are willing to tolerate a little more inflation usually wind up getting a whole lot more than they expected., Bernanke responded that focusing on jobs as well as stable prices is not a distraction for Fed policymakers. He said that the two sides of the mandate are generally complimentary., We agree that low, stable inflation is good for the economy and it's good for growth, it's good for employment, Bernanke said. And we think most of the time that there is a complimentary relationship between those two., At the heart of Ryan's argument is a concern about protecting the value of the dollar, which is eroded by inflation. In fact, Ryan has suggested that the country should return to sound money by pegging the value of the dollar to a basket of commodities, somewhat like the gold standard., In another exchange with Bernanke, Ryan argued that the Fed's response to the financial crisis using extraordinary measures to inject more money into the economy to keep interest rates low has created the risk of massive inflation and dollar devaluation, and set the stage for another crisis., [A] lot of us believe that the Federal Reserve was too loose for too long in the 2003 to 2005 period, and that is what in part led to the asset bubble ... and the problems that we have today, Ryan said., Paul Ryan: Bold Move By Romney, More Ammo For Democrats Or Both?, With Four Candidates Now Campaigning, 'Choice' Is The Theme, I know you don't agree with that, but because you don't agree with that, our fear is that you're just going to repeat these same mistakes again, but by orders of magnitude that we can't even comprehend right now, he said., Bernanke's response was that, so far, there's no evidence of accelerating inflation, and that the Fed has the tools and ability to remove the excess money from the economy once it begins growing again at a healthy rate., Ryan supports legislation that would give the Government Accountability Office the power to audit the Fed's interest rate decisions. Bernanke says that could politicize monetary policy., Ryan also believes the Fed's low interest rate policy has made it easier for Congress to avoid reducing massive federal budget deficits because borrowing costs are so low., That [is] not an excuse for the Federal Reserve to step in and try to bail us out, Ryan said., While Ryan has sparred with the Fed chairman during hearings, he has not called for Bernanke to be replaced. Mitt Romney, however, the man at the top of the ticket, says that if he's elected, he'll find a new Fed chairman.
Shoppers walk along Chicago's Michigan Avenue last month., Shoppers walk along Chicago's Michigan Avenue last month., August 14, 2012, After months of sitting on their wallets, Americans went shopping in July. The uptick reported Tuesday is boosting economists' hopes for a reasonably strong back-to-school season. And retailers are looking for clues about how the holiday shopping season will turn out later in the year., This is a good report, Chris Christopher, an economist with IHS Global Insight, a forecasting firm, wrote in an assessment of the latest report. It indicates that consumers came back after hunkering down during the year's first half when sales were dismal., The Commerce Department said Tuesday that retail sales rose 0.8 percent last month, marking the single biggest gain since February. About two-thirds of all U.S. economic activity involves consumers, so any shopping increase is welcome news, especially for merchants., With the back-to-school shopping season moving into its peak now, retailers are seeing positive signs that consumers are spending, National Retail Federation President Matthew Shay said in a statement., The recent surge in gasoline prices could yet dampen sales of jeans, laptops, lunchboxes and backpacks. Gas prices have jumped 30 cents a gallon in the past month, pushing the national average to $3.70, according to AAA, the auto club., And three years into a recovery, the unemployment rate is still running at a painful 8.3 percent. All of that continues to dampen consumer confidence and spending., Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Credit: Stephanie d'Otreppe / NPR, Americans are not throwing caution to the wind, Christopher said. Robust and enduring consumer spending growth will happen once job prospects improve and consumer confidence jumps out of recession territory., Lisa Mizer, mother of two grade-school students in Twinsburg, Ohio, said she is willing to spend a bit, but not to fill her shopping cart at a time when the job market remains so weak. We're all still just in a holding pattern, she said., Her children need a few new clothes to head off to class, but they don't need long pants and winter coats and things like that until farther in the school year. So even though they're in the stores now, we're not buying them yet., For retailers, the back-to-school sales period is the second most important shopping season of the year, after Christmas. Moreover, retail sales in late summer often are key predictors of how those holiday sales will turn out., Despite continuing concerns about the job market and higher fuel prices, retailers are somewhat optimistic this year. For one thing, there may be a lot of pent-up demand for goods. Consumers who have resisted shopping sprees for years may decide to go ahead and replace outdated electronics, ripped-up backpacks and too-small coats., And there's another reason for retailers to be hopeful: simple math. Schools are adding lots more students this year., That's because the country saw a population boom from 2003 to 2007. In that peak year of 2007, about 4.3 million babies were born up from 4 million born in 2002. This baby boom coincided with the housing boom. As people were moving into bigger houses before the mortgage crisis hit, they were having more babies to fill up those new bedrooms. Now, their children are entering kindergarten and grade school., As a result, back-to-school spending is expected to rise this year by 14 percent, to about $689 per family for clothes and goods including electronics, according to the National Retail Federation, the biggest trade group for merchants. That would be the fastest pace of growth since the survey began in 2003., If that estimate turns out to be correct, that would bring back-to-school sales for the K-12 customers up to $30.3 billion. The trade group based its estimates on polling involving 8,509 consumers, interviewed July 2-9., College enrollment also has been hitting record levels, with total enrollment around 21 million people. The mass movement into college classrooms comes as economists say more education means more job opportunities. For retailers, that could mean more people will be buying everything from sophisticated computers to beanbag chairs., NPR's Sam Sanders contributed to this story.
Delmonico's, the New York City steakhouse, has been around forever., The New York Public Library's archival menu collection doesn't go back quite that far. But it does have a Delmonico's menu from 1918. The archive also, sort of randomly, has a Delmonico's menu from 1988. Delmonico's current menu is online., Click here to view a PDF of Delmonico's menus from 1918, 1988 and 2012., One item that's on all three menus: filet mignon., This allows us to ask an interesting (to us) question: How has the price of filet mignon changed over the past century? Here's the answer, adjusted for inflation., Source: New York Public Library, Delmonico's, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, So the price went way up between 1918 and 1988 then it fell significantly. What drove the price changes?, A restaurant's costs can be split into three buckets: food, labor, and everything else (rent, insurance, marketing, etc). Each bucket accounts for about a third of a restaurant's costs, according to Arno Schmidt, a former executive chef at the Waldorf-Astoria who has worked in kitchens since 1946., The everything else bucket is hard to parse there are, obviously, many details we don't know. Still, we can look at the price of a pound of steak and the price of labor over time., The price of a pound of steak held pretty steady between 1918 and 1988. Then it went way down between 1988 and 2012. (We discussed the decline in meat prices in our post, What Americans Spend On Groceries.), Source: Bureau Of Labor Statistics, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, The price of labor hourly wages for service-sector workers rose significantly between 1918 and 1988. Then it flattened out, as wages stagnated. (We couldn't find a data set for this that runs from 1918 through the present the best one we could find ends at 2002 and is rather inconsistent. If you know of a better one, let us know.), Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo, Taken together, there's a pretty coherent story here and one that resonates with broad shifts in the U.S. economy. Over the course of the 20th century, rising wages drove up the price of a filet mignon at Delmonico's. In recent decades, wages stagnated while beef prices declined, and the price of filet mignon fell., Note: We called Delmonico's about this post. They told us the owner of the restaurant was out of town and not available to comment.
There was a 0.8 percent increase in retail sales in July from June, the Census Bureau says, thanks in part to gains in purchases of cars, furniture and appliances., Overall, The Associated Press says, all major categories showed increases, a sign that consumers may be gaining confidence. If that is indeed the case, it's good news for the economy. Consumers purchase about 70 percent of all goods and services., Bloomberg News leads its report with this: Retail sales in the U.S. rose more than forecast in July as consumer spending rebounded at department stores, auto dealers and electronics outlets, easing some concern the biggest part of the economy was foundering., July's gain was the first monthly increase in four months., Also this morning, the Bureau of Labor Statistics said that wholesale prices rose 0.3 percent in July from June. They were pushed up by a 0.5 percent increase in food costs. Prices of corn, soybeans and some other crops have been on the rise because this summer's drought across much of the nation has hurt production.
The first set of cars put through a new type of safety test did poorly even though they were luxury and near-luxury cars that should have the latest safety technology built in, the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety reports today., On the Web: results of the Insurance Institute for Highway Safety's tests., After putting 11 such 2012 models through tests of what happens when they suffer small overlap frontal crashes in which a car's front corner hits something such as a tree, utility pole or other vehicle, the institute concluded that:, The Acura TL and Volvo S60 earn good ratings, while the Infiniti G earns acceptable. The Acura TSX, BMW 3 series, Lincoln MKZ and Volkswagen CC earn marginal ratings. The Mercedes-Benz C-Class, Lexus IS 250/350, Audi A4 and Lexus ES 350 earn poor., The reason the institute designed the new test is that while modern vehicles generally perform well in tests of what happens in head-on crashes, small overlap frontal crashes continue to be a major source of fatalities:, In a 2009 Institute study of vehicles with good ratings for frontal crash protection, small overlap crashes accounted for nearly a quarter of the frontal crashes involving serious or fatal injury to front seat occupants., To protect car occupants, the institute says, the key in any crash is a strong safety cage that resists deformation. But in most cases involving the cars that were tested, the crush-zone structures did not offer adequate protection from small overlap crashes., The New York Times adds that luxury cars were chosen for the initial set of tests because they tend to be the first models in any given year to offer advances in safety. The next round of testing will involve 15 moderately priced midsize cars., This type of crash is particularly deadly and the first set of cars tested generally didn't provide very good protection., This type of crash is particularly deadly and the first set of cars tested generally didn't provide very good protection.
Telemundo anchor and reporter Jose Diaz-Balart made a notable, if fleeting, appearance during NBC's Republican primary debate last summer. This past June, NBC News and Telemundo announced they would be collaborating on the rest of their 2012 election coverage., This is the second in a three-part series about major American networks trying to appeal to a broader Latino audience., Every morning at 11:45, NBC News officials hold a conference call with their counterparts at sister networks to sort through stories of interest. Among those on the line are executives at CNBC, MSNBC and The Weather Channel; digital news editors; and executives at Telemundo, a Spanish-language broadcast network., NBC News Senior Vice President Alexandra Wallace helps lead the call. She says she relies on Telemundo to keep tabs on stories and events that matter to Hispanics, whether in the U.S. or abroad., The great thing about Telemundo news is they are flagging us now to stories that we might have heard about, but probably haven't heard about, Wallace says. That is a really valuable resource for us. There are things that [take] three weeks to work up to The New York Times. It's very nice to hear about them two days after they start being discussed., It's nice, and maybe even vital. It has been more than a decade since NBC, then run by General Electric, acquired Telemundo for $2.7 billion, yet their interactions have been modest at best, especially on the news side., Hispanics are, after all, growing in numbers, influence, wealth and importance. Witness the presence of Spanish-language commercials on prime-time television, the emergence of such Spanish-language channels as ESPN Deportes (sports) and Fox Deportes, and the debut this week of the Spanish-language channel MundoFox, a partnership between the Fox's broadcast network division and a Colombia-based television network., Over the past year, with encouragement from her new corporate owners at Comcast, Wallace has led NBC News executives in seeking to forge closer connections with Telemundo., The Beginning Of A Beautiful Friendship, It started small. Telemundo's Jose Diaz-Balart, not an unfamiliar face to NBC viewers, filled in as a daytime anchor on MSNBC and appeared with NBC's Brian Williams during a Republican primary debate last summer., He asked Texas Gov. Rick Perry about border patrol and posed a few follow-up questions, but then Diaz-Balart was done for the night. He was thanked by Williams, and left the stage. The sequence came off as a little jarring, but officials at both networks found significance in the appearance., That was one of the first times that someone from Telemundo had actually been integrated into one of the very important events that NBC had, says Alina Falcon, Telemundo's senior executive vice president of news and alternative programming. Even though it was a limited role, having his direct participation in that debate was very significant., In June, Telemundo and NBC announced what they called an unprecedented collaboration for the rest of the 2012 election cycle, joining in polls, convention coverage and town halls., NBC News and Telemundo officials say they now share logistical help, resources and planning. Telemundo reporters with English-language skills are starting to appear more frequently on NBC and MSNBC, and the same occurs on Telemundo for NBC's journalists who can speak Spanish. Telemundo hired former Mexican Foreign Minister Jorge Castaneda to be a foreign policy analyst, and he has appeared several times on NBC News programs as well., For the first time, NBC's Wallace was also given a direct role in overseeing coverage on Telemundo, which has many loyal viewers but runs second in the ratings to its Spanish-language broadcast rival, Univision., A Growth Opportunity, The Latino market is measured to be over a trillion dollars in purchasing power, and it's growing, says Mark Hugo Lopez, associate director of the Pew Hispanic Center. It's growing because the Hispanic population is growing., Roughly 1 in 6 Americans is Latino, and that share is likely to rise. The latest census shows that Hispanics account for more than half the growth in the entire U.S. population from 2000 to 2010., But many established news organizations are not successfully appealing to Hispanic viewers. NBC's top-rated Nightly News with Brian Williams draws proportionately fewer Latinos, compared with their share of the audience overall, than his rivals at ABC and CBS. But all of them lag in drawing Hispanic viewers. After all, viewers of evening television newscasts are trending older and Hispanics are a relatively younger population. Executives at all the major networks look at those tepid numbers and see a big opportunity for growth., But political scientist and Hispanic activist Angelo Falcon (no relation to Telemundo's Alina Falcon) says major English-language news organizations simply haven't taken Latino news seriously on a day-to-day basis., NBC, for example, has Telemundo as part of it, but a lot of people feel Telemundo has been a very marginal part of the whole NBC operation, says Falcon, who is also president of the National Institute for Latino Policy., Yet there are visible signs of cross-pollination. In late July, NBC's Mark Potter reported on the elections in Mexico for NBC Nightly News from Mexico City; but anchor Kate Snow also introduced viewers to Mexico's next president, Enrique Pena Nieto, with excerpts of an interview conducted by Diaz-Balart., The network has also introduced NBCLatino, an English-language site meant to compete with Fox News Latino and Univision's English-language site., NBC's Wallace credits the latest census report for the profound shift in her thinking, as well as that that of her network., In 2008 this was something that I don't remember talking about it as much. I don't remember hearing about it as much, Wallace says. As that population grows, we need to be much more attuned to what is of importance to them.
A commercially harvested crayfish from Lake Tahoe near Incline Village, Nev., in July., A commercially harvested crayfish from Lake Tahoe near Incline Village, Nev., in July., Around the country, environmentalists are cooking up ways to battle invasive species by serving them up on a platter., Over in the mid-Atlantic, they're broiling up the snakeheads that have taken over local lakes and rivers. In the Southeastern U.S., they're writing cookbooks to inspire gourmands to get coral reef-destroying lionfish out of the waters and into the frying pan. Now, Lake Tahoe is getting into the act., Last month, the state of Nevada gave business entrepreneur Fred Jackson the green light to harvest crayfish in Lake Tahoe. It's the first time since the 1930s that commercial fishing has been allowed in the lake. Jackson's venture is small, but the hope is that it will keep the lake clear of algae and provide a local dish for area visitors., Scientists estimate Lake Tahoe is home to around 300 million crayfish. The crustaceans graze on algae at the bottom of the lake they're like cattle in the landscape, says Sudeep Chandra, a freshwater biologist at the University of Nevada, Reno. Algae cloud the lake waters but the crayfish only make matters worse by eating them, Chandra says., They can graze some algae down, but when they excrete nutrients, they can stimulate algal production, he says., As The New York Times points out, crayfish were introduced to Lake Tahoe more than a century ago. Over time, they've contributed to algae growth that's diminished the clarity of Lake Tahoe's storied clear blue waters. It's a major concern for state and regional environmental agencies., Because reducing the crayfish population will help clean up the lake, Jackson's business venture has received virtually no criticism from local environmental groups., But the venture's impact on lake clarity overall depends on California lawmakers. That's because two-thirds of Lake Tahoe is in California, and that state has yet to lift its ban on commercial harvesting of crayfish on the lake. The cost of environmental studies and permits has stalled legislation that would repeal the California ban., In the meantime, Jackson is busy finding the best harvesting sites on the Nevada side of Lake Tahoe through simple trial and error. On a recent trip out onto the lake, he and his nephew, Justin Pulliam, check on traps set 48 hours earlier., This is what we're looking for, right here, Jackson says when he pulls up a bucket full of crayfish., Pretty good, Pulliam agrees., The two men empty the traps and quickly head to shore, where the crayfish will soon be served up at a local casino seafood buffet., Betty B Gorman, the president of South Lake Tahoe Chamber of Commerce, says Tahoe crayfish are a new product the chamber can market to tourists as a local food., We don't grow anything up here. It's hard to make a gourmet dish out of pine boughs, she says, laughing. We don't have pine tree oil; we don't have a lot of products.
Google will buy the Frommer's travel guides from John Wiley &amp; Sons., Google will buy the Frommer's travel guides from John Wiley &amp; Sons., Google will buy the Frommer's travel guide from John Wiley &amp; Sons, Inc., the publishing company announced Monday., On August 10, 2012, Wiley entered into a definitive agreement to sell all of its travel assets, including all of its interests in the Frommer's brand, to Google, Wiley said in a statement on its website. Proceeds from this sale, and others that may arise from the sale of other consumer assets, will be redeployed to support growth opportunities in Professional/Trade; Scientific, Technical, Medical, and Scholarly; and Global Education businesses., Financial terms were not disclosed, but The New York Times, in its Media Decoder blog said Google will pay about $23 million for Frommer's., In March, Hoboken, N.J.-based Wiley announced it planned to sell several of its consumer print and digital publishing assets, including Frommer's, Webster's New World, and CliffsNotes., Frommer's, which began in 1957 with Arthur Frommer's Europe on $5 a Day, publishes more than 300 guidebooks. It also runs the popular Frommers.com website. Wiley bought Frommer's in 2001., Here's more about the deal from The Associated Press:, Google Inc., which bought the Zagat restaurant review service in September, plans to use Frommer's guides to hotels and destinations around the world to complement the Zagat listings., The Wall Street Journal reported that owning Frommer's could allow Google to sell travel-related ads against search results that feature Frommer's., Frommer's data about local businesses around the world also could boost the Google+ business listings and Google Maps, the Journal reported., Here's more from the Journal:, Google said Monday it hasn't yet decided whether the Frommer's guidebooks will continue to be published in print or whether they will eventually migrate entirely to online. It is also possible that the Frommer's brand could be melded into the Zagat brand, which Google acquired last year.
Hogs at a farm in Elma, Iowa (2009 file photo)., Hogs at a farm in Elma, Iowa (2009 file photo)., President Obama not coincidentally chose Iowa today as the backdrop for his announcement that the federal government is buying $170 million worth of pork, chicken, lamb and catfish to help producers who've been hit hard by drought-related increases in feed costs and by soft prices because of overproduction., If shoring up prices was one of the goals, it's worked so far for hog farmers. Word that $100 million of the $170 million will be spent on pork has driven hog prices up today, the Des Moines Register writes., Before today, hog prices had been down by about 15 percent since the end of 2011 as record production of hogs has threatened to oversupply the market, the Register adds. Iowa, the nation's largest hog producing state, has reported inventories of hogs at a record 20 million since late 2011, in large measure because of improved productivity of sows who now average ten pigs or more per litter., Under the program announced this morning, the federal government will also buy $50 million worth of chicken, and $10 million each of lamb and catfish. The products will go food nutrition assistance programs, including food banks, according to the U.S. Agriculture Department.
Google is eliminating about 20 percent of the jobs at Motorola Mobility, the struggling cellphone manufacturer it finished acquiring earlier this year for $12.5 billion, according to reports from The New York Times, Dow Jones' All Things Digital blog and other news outlets., About 4,000 positions will be eliminated. One-third of the cuts, around 1,300 jobs, will be at U.S. operations., Motorola's Droid Razr Maxx., Motorola's Droid Razr Maxx., Dennis Woodside, Motorola's chief executive, tells the Times that the company is still excited about the smartphone business., Google acquired Motorola Mobility in large part to get the cellphone maker's more than 17,000 technology patents., According to the Times, the company will shrink operations in Asia and India, and center research and development in Chicago, Sunnyvale and Beijing ... [and] cut the number of devices Motorola makes from the 27 it introduced last year to just a few.
As lobster prices plunge, scallops offer fishermen an alternative to make money., As lobster prices plunge, scallops offer fishermen an alternative to make money., If you don't love scallops, you probably just haven't had one that's cooked properly. That is, pan fried with some garlic and butter and herbs. They are very tasty., In Maine, scientists and fishermen are learning how to farm, instead of catching, these tasty sea critters. That could be good for business and the environment., Out on the water off Stonington, Maine, Marsden Brewer is motoring his lobster boat through the crowded fishing harbor. Today, just about all the boats here are lobster boats. But 30 years ago, he says, it was a different story., You see all the boats and stuff? Come Nov. 1, most of them would all be rigged up for scalloping. There was that many scallops in [close to] shore here, Brewer says. Now there's maybe four boats that go., Brewer says there just aren't as many scallops to catch these days close to shore in the areas these boats fish. (Offshore, in fishing grounds such as Georges Bank, federal regulations that started going into effect in the late 1990s have helped scallops make a huge comeback. And seafood watchdog groups list them as a good choice for people who eat seafood. But inshore there are still far fewer sea scallops than there used to be.), An Aquaculture Experiment, Brewer would like to see more of these boats return to scalloping this time by farming scallops. That could make better business and environmental sense. In some places, sea scallops are still plentiful. But in others their numbers have been reduced. Farming scallops would take pressure off the natural stocks., Fisherman Marsden Brewer (left) and researcher Dana Morse are still refining their techniques for sea scallop farming., Fisherman Marsden Brewer (left) and researcher Dana Morse are still refining their techniques for sea scallop farming., Outside the harbor, Brewer motors over to one of his green and orange lobster buoys. He grabs the buoy and uses the winch on his lobster boat to haul up an experiment two big wire mesh cages that he's farming sea scallops in., On board, Brewer has a scientist who's helping with this aquaculture testing. Dana Morse is with the Maine Sea Grant program and University of Maine Cooperative Extension, which works with farmers and fishermen., Oh, I'm psyched here. We stocked them a couple of weeks ago and so this is my first look since, Morse says., Pretty soon, out of the clear cold Maine water, the scallop farming cages rise up from the bottom 50 feet below, and the two men lift them onto the deck of the boat. The crates are filled with thousands of small baby scallops., The cages are about 4 feet wide and several feet high. Inside, stacks of mesh-lined trays hold and protect the scallops, which are each a little smaller than a dime at this stage., Scallops are not like mussels that just sit stuck to a rock. These little guys squeeze water out of their shells to propel them away from starfish or other predators. That's why you have to farm them in cages; otherwise, they'd swim away. They also have rows of deep blue eyes in between their shells., Little sea scallops they're beautiful little beasts. Particularly when they're young, you get all these zigzag, modeled stripy colors in there, Morse says., The scallops fetch a nice price at the dock, too. Lately, the price of lobster has plummeted and that's hurting fishermen like Brewer. So this is another way to make money. Instead of just pulling up lobster traps, one day they could be pulling up crates full of farmed scallops., Just the future for the community is what it amounts to. You know, I've been involved in most all the fisheries over the course of my life, and this is lobsters about the only one left, Brewer says., The Art Of 'Skal-Up' Farming, People have tried to farm sea scallops in the U.S. before but researcher Morse says it hasn't worked very well. A big problem is that the little larval scallops take a long time to grow and don't do well in a hatchery., Sea scallops squeeze water out of their shells to propel them away from starfish or other predators. That's why they must be farmed in cages; otherwise, they'd swim away., But a few years ago, Morse went with a delegation to Japan. It turns out the Japanese have the real secret to farming sea scallops., For people thinking about either restocking natural populations or doing aquaculture, the question is how do you get your seed? And the Japanese technique turned out to be very applicable to the species of scallop that we have here: Placopecten magellanicus, Morse says., It's very low-tech. Catching tiny baby scallops out in the ocean can be done with wadded-up netting sort of like a bunch of onion bags from the supermarket. If you suspend the netting in the ocean in the right spot, thousands of baby scallops will float in naturally and start growing there before getting transferred to bigger cages., Morse and Brewer toss their scallop cages back into the water before they get too warm. Up here, by the way, they're pronounced scallups&mdash; not skal-ups., Aquaculture experiments like this are not without their occasional mishaps. Brewer's wife, Donna, has come along to help record the size of the scallops, and there's also a radio reporter stumbling around. With so many people on board, somebody kicks a water pipe off the bottom of a big lobster tank and sea water starts pouring into the boat., But probably the biggest potential snafu in this farming effort will be getting regulatory approval. Morse and Brewer think they have the technique coming together pretty well, but before anyone can farm scallops commercially, state and federal authorities will have to give it the OK and come up with a set of regulations.
Traders prepare for the start of early trading at the New York Stock Exchange. Some say there's been a loss of faith in the stock market's return on investment over the last 15 years., Traders prepare for the start of early trading at the New York Stock Exchange. Some say there's been a loss of faith in the stock market's return on investment over the last 15 years., Ten years ago, Andres Cortez, a chauffeur in Los Angeles, might have been part of the hordes of people dabbling in day trading or haunting the online stock forums. He might have been bragging to his friends about the money he made in tech stocks, or learning how to margin trade at a night school., &ldquo; [The stock market] is not where the real money has been flowing this year. The real money has been flowing into mattresses, so to speak., - David Santschi, Trims Tab Investment Research, Instead, he keeps his distance from stocks., As he stands by his car and waits for a passenger downtown, Cortez says he has a little money he's put aside and is keeping it in a savings account, where it earns virtually nothing., I read some books about the stock market and stuff, and I don't feel like I understand it enough to really get involved in it, he says. He also saw the documentary Inside Job, about the 2008 financial crisis. That totally scared me away from the stock market., Four years after the crisis erupted, the stock market is on the upswing. The Dow Jones industrial average hit a four-year high this week. With interest rates so low, stocks have become the least-worst place for many institutional investors to park their money., But a lot of small investors are sitting the rally out., Forty-six percent of U.S. households now have money in stocks or stock mutual funds, down from 59 percent in 2001, says the Investment Company Institute. This year alone, some $70 billion has been pulled out of stock funds., When people have money to spare, they tend to keep it in savings and checking accounts, though they earn much less money there, says David Santschi, executive vice president of operations at TrimTabs Investment Research, which tracks money flows., [The stock market] is not where the real money has been flowing this year, he says. The real money has been flowing into mattresses, so to speak., It's not hard to figure out why so many small investors have fled stocks., A lot of people are scared and tired, says former Treasury Department official Neel Kashkari, now head of global equities at the bond giant PIMCO. If you think about the financial crisis, which really started in '07 and exploded in '08, and now the lingering effects ... this has now been going on a long time, Kashkari says. People are, I think, getting tired of it and are scared., Kashkari says people just don't want the downside, and say they've worked too hard for their savings. So instead they decided to sit on the sidelines until this passes., People got a beating during the [recession], and many small investors don't have a lot of nest eggs to lose, says Sung Won Sohn, professor of economics at California State University Channel Islands. Many of them lost their retirement funds and 401(k)s., That bad experience left a very bad taste in their mouths, Sohn says, and they're not ready to jump into the stock market, even if they have the money which they don't., Investors have been further soured by incidents like the 2010 flash crash and the recent Knight Capital fiasco, when stock prices gyrated dramatically in the space of a few minutes, making the market seem volatile and even rigged against small investors., This loss of faith in stocks represents a profound psychological shift on the part of investors. Fifteen years ago, it was conventional wisdom that stocks represented the best place to put your money, because they tended to enjoy the highest, most consistent returns over time, a view popularized by Wharton professor Jeremy Siegel, among others. As a result, many millions of Americans put their retirement money into stock mutual funds., Stocks may still be the best bet for many investors, but it's hard to get that message across to people who have spent years watching their 401(k)s lose ground. Stocks fell so far during the 2000s that someone who bought shares in 2001 may still be behind, Sohn says., People can see that, and they've been told stories about the stock market, how wonderful it had been and will be, but that is no longer true, he says., But Sohn also says investors might be overreacting, going from having too much faith in the markets to having too little. There are still plenty of strong companies that make big profits and pay regular dividends, and they will be well-positioned to grow if and when the economy finally recovers., The fact is that the bulk of our economy is represented in the stock market and there are very good companies, he says, and as long as you believe in America and in the American economy, in the long run there will be many companies which will do reasonably well.
Do these packets hold the keys to health? A consumer group says no., Ok guys, reality check here: Nutella is not really a health food, POM Wonderful may be wonderful, but it doesn't necessarily prevent heart disease and... eating Splenda Essentials doesn't single-handedly make the pounds drop off., But some people could be led to believe that it does. At least that's the contention of a class action lawsuit filed against Splenda Essentials, an artificial no-calorie sweetener, on Thursday by the Center for Science in the Public Interest., The group is representing three consumers in California who say they're being misled., For example? Well, depending on which Essential you think is most essential, the website claims that using Splenda's B-vitamin-, fiber- or antioxidant-enriched powder, you can make everything you sweeten a little better for you., But fortifying an artificial sweetener with vitamins or fiber doesn't make it 'essential' for health, says CSPI in their press release about the lawsuit. The group says the label falsely implies you can lose weight or avoid disease by using the product., Johnson &amp; Johnson, which owns the Splenda brand, tells The Salt it doesn't comment on litigation., Ultimately, the U.S. District Court in Northern California, where the case was filed, will decide. Why there? The state has particularly strong consumer protection laws., With everyone, it seems, turning into a picky eater, it makes sense that food manufacturers push the envelope to tout the benefits of consuming their products. What's the deal, though, with making health claims when marketing food?, It's up to the Food and Drug Administration to oversee food labels, but food advertising regulation is shepherded by the Federal Trade Commission. What you can or can't say about a product in a health claim relies on whether there's scientific evidence to back it up., Exactly what you'll need will depend on the claims you're making, writes the FTC on their Bureau of Consumer Protection site, but newspaper articles, letters from satisfied customers or other non-scientific material won't be sufficient., And a lot of claims don't pass official muster. Some, like a class action suit brought against Diamond Walnuts for touting the benefits of Omega 3 for heart health, get settled outside of court., Why does the FTC have a hand in this stuff at all? They want the messages on food to be accurate, FTC Division of Advertising Practices Director Mary Engle tells The Salt, because consumers most likely can't judge for themselves whether the food has the claimed benefit., That's because health benefits often relate to conditions that take a long time to develop, she adds, and it's impossible to know objectively if something worked or didn't imagine a medical study with a sample size of one., Still, much like health conditions, it can take a while for the wheels of justice to turn. In the meantime, have a helping of skepticism before you get served humble pie.
A bank owned sign in front of a home in Miami last October., A bank owned sign in front of a home in Miami last October., Saying it wants to protect homeowners from surprises and costly mistakes by their mortgage servicers, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau today proposed new rules it believes would make the home loan process simpler and give struggling homeowners more of a chance to avoid foreclosures., If the rules go into effect next January as the bureau plans, The Associated Press says, mortgage servicing companies would be required to provide clear monthly billing statements, warn borrowers before interest rate hikes and actively help them avoid foreclosure., As The Hill writes:, The new rules target an industry that has been plagued with problems. ... Complaints have mounted over shoddy servicing as the amount of homeowners struggling to avoid foreclosure skyrocketed after the housing bubble burst. The industry has found itself under fire from lawmakers and the White House, and widespread problems with mortgage servicing resulted in a $25 billion government settlement with some of the nation's largest banks, where they agreed to pay out billions to help cover refinancing costs for homeowners and reimburse them for haphazard foreclosure practices., Problems in the industry were highlighted by the practice of 'robo-signing,' in which services would speedily sign off on foreclosure documents without reviewing or verifying their contents., According to the consumer bureau, the rules would, among other things:, &mdash; Generally require servicers to provide clear monthly statements., &mdash; Require servicers to provide earlier disclosures before interest rate adjustment for most adjustable-rate mortgages., &mdash; Require servicers to make good-faith efforts to contact delinquent borrowers and inform them of their options to help avoid foreclosure. And, mortgage servicers could not go ahead with a foreclosure until after a final decision has been reached on a borrower's application for an option to avoid foreclosure or unless a borrower fails to perform on that option., &mdash; Require a payment be credited to a borrower's account as of the day that a payment is received., Related posts:, &mdash; Report: Fannie Mae Missed Chances To Stop Robo-Signing., &mdash; Settlement Reached With Banks On Relief For Some Homeowners., &mdash; Deal With Banks Isn't Only Way For Homeowners To Get Help, HUD Chief Says.
Francisco Cortes started at Fox as an apprentice, then rose through the ranks to become Fox News Latino's first director., This is the first in a three-part series about major American networks trying to appeal to a broader Latino audience., In a glass-walled conference room at Fox News in New York, reporter Bryan Llenas and two of his colleagues discuss the nature and success of their news site, Fox News Latino, largely aimed at English-speaking Hispanics., Maybe a dozen feet away, two pundits can be seen heatedly arguing in a Fox News TV studio., Fox News Latino is different than Fox News, Llenas says with a smile. You know what? That's the purpose to add value., As Hispanics make up an increasing and increasingly important part of the U.S. population, major media companies are courting them with a newfound intensity. Latinos make up one-sixth of the nation's population, but accounted for more than half of the country's population growth from 2000 to 2010, according to the latest census., The Univision and Telemundo television networks have sewn up much of the nation's Spanish-dominant viewers; in fact, Univision is one of the nation's highest-rated broadcast networks in any language. But news organizations see major opportunities in targeting Hispanics who predominantly speak English, and Fox News Latino has been enjoying a strong head start by tweaking the formula that defines the cable network that gave it life. The site drew 3.3 million unique visitors in June, according to estimates from Omni Site Catalyst provided by Fox, and that's considered a strong showing for a niche site., They're very good, says Angelo Falcon, a political scientist, activist and president of the National Institute for Latino Policy. They cover a lot of issues that are important to the Latino community ... They cover things that the mainstream media really doesn't pay much attention to., Speaking To The Latino Community, Fox News Latino doesn't treat American Hispanics as a monolithic cultural, economic or political force. And that can be credited with some of its early fortune., The site started up in late 2010, with a push from Fox News Chairman Roger Ailes. Fox News Latino Director Francisco Cortes was rising through the ranks from an apprenticeship named for Ailes to a senior producer for Fox's news programming when he was summoned by his bosses., Mr. Ailes himself ... wanted to see how to strategize on how to speak to the Latino community, Cortes recalls. They wanted to know ... how do we go about talking to one of the most influential groups in the U.S., With colleagues, Cortes devised a website that features staff-written pieces and aggregates news coverage from other sources, particularly abroad. The site's articles are largely in English., Our target audience is second- and third-generation U.S. Hispanics, Cortes says, but we also don't want to ignore first-generation Hispanics who have deep ties to their homeland., The site has paid particular attention to such stories as the recent presidential elections in Mexico, the triumphs and troubles of Hispanic politicians, and congressional clashes over immigration policy. Lighter pieces include a look at a Mexican-style rodeo held in the Bronx., A Divide Between Fox News And Fox News Latino, Yet some Hispanic activists and critics on the left say there is a pronounced divide between their treatment on the Fox News Latino website and on Fox News itself, especially on the cable channel's highly rated opinion shows., You have someone like Bill O'Reilly who's always out looking to take potshots at Latino advocacy groups and Latino issues. [He's] very anti-immigrant, says political scientist and activist Falcon., O'Reilly would undoubtedly disagree with that assessment. But during one recent exchange, he invited a Latina campaigning against use of the word illegals onto his top-rated Fox News show, The O'Reilly Factor, only to ask her four times whether she was an illegal alien. (The activist, Monica Novoa, said she was not, all four times.), But the website also has the potential to inform and influence the news channel's coverage., In March, for example, Fox News Latino's Llenas appeared on Fox News to describe the results of a poll commissioned by the website. Llenas noted that Hispanic voters care more about the economy than immigration, but said that the latter issue defines their moral compass., Eighty-five percent support undocumented workers working in this country, he said on the air. If you ask them whether they prefer the word 'illegal' versus 'undocumented,' a majority of them believe that the word 'illegal,' the term 'illegal immigrant,' is offensive., In May, Fox News' Geraldo Rivera wrote a column for the site denouncing pundits including those on the Fox News channel itself for using the term., Competition Is Catching Up, Now, however, the site is facing new competition in their pursuit of English-speaking Hispanics., A year ago, The Huffington Post created HuffPost LatinoVoices, and a few weeks ago, NBC News unveiled its version., NBC News' top digital executive, Vivian Schiller, says news officials all over are seeking to tap into the same growing and previously underserved market., Advertisers are interested in reaching Latino audiences. And so this is a commercial venture in the sense that we sell advertising, and we think it is a good business, Schiller, a former NPR CEO, said during a public question-and-answer session at the Chautauqua Institution in upstate New York. But it is also a critically important project for us, and I feel a tremendous responsibility to serve diverse audiences., Fox executives say they are driven by the same impulses: to find future sources of profit and to serve the public better., A One-Stop Shop For News, Elizabeth Llorente, senior reporter at Fox News Latino, grew up in Union City, N.J., with a blend of American tastes and those of her family's native Cuba. She's a fan of Celia Cruz and the Rolling Stones. Before joining Fox's new website, Llorente won awards for her coverage of immigration issues at the Bergen County Record in New Jersey., For intellectual nourishment that touched on her interests, she says she used to concoct her own stew from a variety of news sources: I'd go to The New York Times; I'd go to Univision; I'd go to the ethnic newspaper serving the community., Here at Fox News Latino, it's all there for you, she says, so you don't have to be making your own stew.
A girl checks out the options at Rocky Point Creamery in Tuscarora, Md., one of seven farms on the state's ice cream trail., A girl checks out the options at Rocky Point Creamery in Tuscarora, Md., one of seven farms on the state's ice cream trail., Some enterprising dairy farmers in rural Maryland have found a new source of income opening ice cream shops on their farms. This summer, seven of them have come together to form Maryland's Best Ice Cream Trail, the nation's first farm-based ice cream trail. And the results so far seem pretty sweet., On a hot Sunday afternoon in July, the lure of ice cream at Rocky Point Creamery in Frederick County, Md., is hard to resist. Morris Gladhill drives about 14 miles to the creamery once a week. Today he has come prepared with a small cooler. Well, I needed to be able to take some home! he says., Pam Joseph from Lucketts, Va., is also a regular. She holds a soft-serve chocolate and vanilla twist. I think this is some of the best ice cream I've ever had, she says, and what I found out from talking with the folks here is that it's milk made from their dairy that they use to make the ice cream., The folks here are Chuck Fry, his wife, Paula, and two of their adult children. The Rocky Point Farm has been in their family since 1883. We milk 200 cows, farm 1,500 acres. We're kind of busy, Chuck Fry says., The Frys have gotten a lot busier since they opened the ice cream shop this past spring. In June, they joined Maryland's Best Ice Cream Trail, a program launched by the Maryland Department of Agriculture this summer to promote the state's dairies., It's been outstanding, Paula Fry says. She manages the Rocky Point Creamery. People are coming in with their little pamphlets and getting their stamps and are really excited to visit these different farms. The pamphlets are bright yellow passports that customers can get stamped at each stop on the ice cream trail. They can enter completed passports in a drawing to win a $50 gift certificate for ice cream., Rocky Point Creamery cows say hello., Rocky Point Creamery cows say hello., Chuck Fry says the creamery is satisfying an old-fashioned craving. Craziest thing I ever heard tell of, driving an hour to get an ice cream cone, Fry says, but we do real banana splits with real bananas, and that doesn't exist too much anymore., Neither do local dairy farms. According to the Maryland Department of Agriculture, in the past two decades, the number of Maryland dairy farms has dropped from more than 1,400 to fewer than 500. Chuck Fry says that he and other dairy farmers face several challenges, including price fluctuation., It's also tough for Maryland farmers to expand their dairies owing to urban sprawl. According to Buddy Hance, secretary of MDA, making and selling ice cream to the public is one way dairy farmers can add value to their product. This is just an opportunity for our dairy industry to continue to survive, he says., Chuck Fry says the Rocky Point Creamery will be critical to keeping his dairy going. Profits from the shop have already helped to pay some of the dairy operation's bills, and business at the shop has picked up since the ice cream trail started. When it opened, the Rocky Point Creamery sold 3,500 scoops per month. Now, it's selling that much every week., Chuck Fry says he may even keep the business open in the winter, when ice cream shops like his typically close for the season., Maryland's Best Ice Cream Trail is the only farm-based ice cream trail in the country so far, but if you're in the mood for mixing your ice cream with a road trip, you can check out Sundae Drives in Eastern Connecticut or the New Hampshire Dairy Trail.
For more, see our posts The Price Of College Tuition and What America Owes In Student Loans., Tuition has gone through the roof in the past decade. But so has financial aid., Grants scholarships and other money that doesn't have to be paid back have risen by more than 50 percent, to nearly $7,000 per student per year. (That's after adjusting for inflation.) Student loans have risen by a similar amount., Source: College Board, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, The breakdown of aid has also changed, as the following graph makes clear., Source: College Board, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, A few notes:, The federal government is clearly the largest provider of financial aid, by far. That fact hasn't changed over the past decade., But federal grants have increased significantly in the past five years. During the same time, private loans have fallen sharply. Those two trends are related: A bill passed in 2010 changed the financial aid landscape significantly, reducing the role for private lenders and expanding federal grants. (Here's more detail on that.), That big rise in private loans between 2000 and 2005 was partly driven by the law that made it impossible to discharge student loan debt in bankruptcy. That made it more appealing for private lenders to target students. (Congress is currently rethinking the rules regarding student loans and bankruptcy)., Federal tax benefits are essentially a government subsidy for paying tuition, so the College Board includes them in its financial aid numbers. Those benefits are set to expire at the end of this year., The figures in this post come from the College Board's report Trends in Student Aid, which has lots more data. The two graphics were created from two separate data sets, which categorize grants and loans in slightly different ways., For More: See our posts The Price Of College Tuition and What America Owes In Student Loans.
Microbrewery Boulder Beer uses Mobile Canning's equipment to pack its brews., Microbrewery Boulder Beer uses Mobile Canning's equipment to pack its brews., Beer snobs and craft brewers alike have rediscovered beer cans in recent years, defying the old stereotype that quality beer comes only in bottles, or that cans are just for mass market stuff. But for the smallest microbreweries, the question wasn't can or bottle, it was whether they could afford the equipment and storage space to package their beer at all. Many could not., That began to change last winter, when new companies sprang up in three of the U.S.'s craft beer capitals - Colorado, northern California, and the Pacific Northwest - with a can-do proposition: Put a fully automated canning line on a truck, and package beer wherever and whenever a brewer requests., Mobile Canning, based in Longmont, Colo., was the first to get up and running back in November. Co-owners Pat Hartman and Ron Popma were inspired by the mobile bottling companies that service California wineries and other areas. I got to thinking, why not cans? Cans are the way to go these days, Hartman says., Small brewers say canning services save them the cost of having to order cans by the thousands or find a place to store them all, plus the cost of equipment. And while bottles can be bought in smaller quantities, filling them by hand is time-consuming., Mobile Canning is just one of a handful of cans-on-wheels services found around the country. Others include The Can Van in San Francisco and Northwest Canning in Washington state., All three use automated canning lines from Wild Goose Engineering, which include machines that clean, fill, seal and label the cans. They're designed to be modular and easy to set up and break down. Everything's on wheels, Hartman says, so the equipment can be unloaded and assembled in about 45 minutes. Canners also make the investment in bulk orders of blank cans to which breweries can affix their own labels., Tom Horst, owner of Crystal Springs Brewing Company in Boulder is Mobile Canning's smallest customer. He brews on a two-barrel system, the equivalent of just four kegs of beer per batch. That's about 50 times less than most other craft brewers. I think what Mobile Canning is doing is really cool, Horst says, especially for nano breweries like Crystal Springs that can't make canning work on their own., Horst was already filling 22-ounce bottles by hand and distributing kegs to Boulder restaurants, but jumped at the opportunity to can his summer seasonal brew, a light German-style ale. It's a pretty delicate beer, he says. The bottle is not a good package for it., That's because bottles - even the dark brown ones - can let in small amounts of light and oxygen, two of beer's worst enemies. Cans not only keep out light and air, they also weigh less and are more easily recyclable than glass., I was aiming for cans, says Brian O'Connell, the chief beer officer at Denver's Renegade Brewing, another Mobile Canning customer. Renegade now cans about 600 cases a month, which puts their beer on store shelves throughout the Denver area. O'Connell says the cans are popular with outdoorsy types, because they can take them to national parks and other places where glass is banned. Especially in Colorado, I think people seek them out, he says., O'Connell says Mobile Canning frees microbreweries to grow in other ways. Instead of spending my money on a canning line and space for it, I'm spending my money on buying more tanks and hiring more staff., And, of course, brewing more beer.
There were 361,000 first-time claims for unemployment insurance last week, the Employment and Training Administration says. That's down 6,000 from the week before (that previous week's total was revised up by 2,000)., Claims have stayed in a range between 350,000 and 400,000 all year. The unemployment rate, meanwhile, has also varied little: it's low this year has been 8.1 percent and the high has been 8.3 percent., At best, economist Joel Naroff tells Bloomberg News, the labor market is slowly but steadily improving. The Associated Press says claims are running at a level consistent with only modest gains in hiring.
Workers move a section of well casing into place at a Chesapeake Energy natural gas well site near Burlington, Pa., in 2010., Workers move a section of well casing into place at a Chesapeake Energy natural gas well site near Burlington, Pa., in 2010., A drop in natural gas prices is hurting balance sheets across the petroleum industry. The second-largest natural gas producer in the United States Oklahoma City-based Chesapeake Energy has been hit especially hard., After 23 consecutive years of touting its increasing natural gas production, Chesapeake CEO Aubrey McClendon told investors during a conference call Tuesday that the company projects its gas output will drop about 7 percent in 2013., Chesapeake has been a leading cheerleader for the natural gas drilling booms taking place across the country. But prices have dropped to about $3 per 1,000 cubic feet (1,000 cubic feet of natural gas will supply the average U.S. home for about four days). That price is less than a third of what Chesapeake and other companies were selling natural gas for in 2008., They're, in some ways, a victim of their own success, says Ken Medlock, the James A. Baker, III, and Susan G. Baker Fellow in Energy and Resource Economics at Rice University., Medlock says a warmer-than-expected winter chilled demand. That, combined with increasing supply, sent prices tumbling., Gas production is up because of controversial technologies like hydraulic fracturing. Fracking, as it's better known, has made it possible to extract gas trapped in tight shale formations deep underground. But there's concern about fracking's effect on the environment., Some in the entertainment industry have signed on as fracking opponents. Last month on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon, Yoko Ono held a globe labeled Mother Earth while her son Sean Lennon sang Please don't frack my mother., A Shareholder Backlash, Creative activism is just one of the challenges Chesapeake Energy faces. In May, a shareholder backlash prompted the company's board of directors to strip Aubrey McClendon of his chairmanship, though he remains CEO., In June, the company said the Securities and Exchange Commission launched an investigation into a compensation program for McClendon, called the Founder Well Participation Program. It gave McClendon a stake in wells the company drilled., McClendon and the company agreed to end the program early after much criticism. Questions were raised because McClendon borrowed money against his stakes in the wells to pay for drilling costs., More recently, there have been questions about whether Chesapeake colluded with another gas company to suppress how much it paid for land leases in Michigan., After years of fast growth, Chesapeake is making changes., By being so aggressive and really pushing an aggressive acquisition and drilling program, they've had to sort of reach outside themselves a little bit and seek some capital infusion, says Medlock, at Rice University., A Shift In Business, Chesapeake is selling assets, including a pipeline division for nearly $600 million. And now the company says it will drill more for oil and other petroleum products that can bring in extra cash., But Chesapeake likely will always be primarily a natural gas company. And McClendon says when prices rebound, his company will be prepared to benefit., We think a multiyear up-cycle is now under way, McClendon told investors Tuesday, The die has been cast, the chess pieces on the table have been played, and now it's just a matter of physics and time for them to play out., As Chesapeake and other companies have cut back on drilling, prices have started rising in recent weeks. And if this winter is a cold one, that could help Chesapeake and other natural gas companies boost their profits.
Steve Inskeep speaks with Jim Zarroli on 'Morning Edition', As its stock tumbled today following word that New York State regulators have labeled it a rogue institution that allegedly hid about 60,000 secret transactions involving $250 billion in Iranian funds, Britain's Standard Chartered Bank strongly denied the accusations., It rejects the position or portrayal of facts as set out in the order, the bank said., As NPR's Jim Zarroli said on Morning Edition, New York State's Department of Financial Services on Monday said that Standard Chartered had for almost 10 years ... schemed with the government of Iran and hid from regulators roughly 60,000 secret transactions, involving at least $250 billion. The actions, from January 2001 through 2007, happened at a time when Iranian financial institutions were subject to U.S. economic sanctions, the regulators noted., The bank, however, said the order issued by the US regulator did not present 'a full and accurate picture of the facts,' the BBC reports. According to the BBC:, It said that it had conducted a review of its transactions, primarily those relating to Iran for the period between 2001 to 2007, and had given regular updates to the US authorities on the results of the investigation., 'As we have disclosed to the authorities, well over 99.9% of the transactions relating to Iran complied with U-turn regulations,' the bank said., 'The total value of transactions which did not follow the U-turn was under $14m.', The so-called U-turn transactions are those started outside the US by non-Iranian foreign banks that pass through the U.S. financial system on the way to other non-Iranian foreign banks.
For years, car insurance companies have set rates based on where a driver lives. But new in-car tracking devices may soon transform how drivers are charged for insurance., To the average consumer, car insurance can seem pretty arbitrary. What you get charged often depends more on where you drive than how you drive., John Egan of InsuranceQuotes.com says it's very often about location, location, location. Two people, he says, can live in two different zip codes in the same city and pay a substantially different amount of money, depending on exactly where [they] live in your community., How much a driver pays also varies widely from state to state. State laws about personal injury and liability go into the mix, along with a whole host of other factors., Massachusetts drivers pay the lowest premiums, Egan says, while Michigan drivers pay the most., In the Detroit area in particular, there are a lot of uninsured drivers, Egan says. And when you've got more uninsured drivers, that tends to drive up the cost for everybody who does have car insurance., A Whole New Pricing Model, But while those pricing swings from zip code to zip code are well-entrenched, there's also a big change under way in the car insurance business, as advances in technology transform how the industry functions., There's always been a lot of competition for auto insurance, says Bob Passmore, a senior director with the Property Casualty Insurers Association of America and a 30-year industry veteran. But I think the way that insurers do business, and the way that they advertise their business, has changed., One result car advertising has proliferated on television., But there are other shifts under way, as well. The recent recession, says Passmore, means there are fewer new cars to insure., At the same time, the Internet is making it easier for consumers to find the lowest price just as insurers are streamlining their practices with new high-tech tools., For the first time ever, we can now go in as an industry and observe individual driving behavior, says Richard Hutchinson, a general manager with Progressive Insurance., Historically, the industry has priced based on modeling, which is more arbitrary than an individualized quote based on one's actual activity, Hutchinson says., But today, Progressive can put a device in your car that determines how well you drive tracking if a driver frequently slams on the breaks, for example., With that data, the company can then determine how much that driver should pay for insurance. Other companies are now following suit., Better Rates, But At A Price, These kinds of advances are the cutting edge of the business, and companies are even moving from devices that track not just how you drive, but also tell you when you're doing something reckless or dangerous., Dave Ferrick of Agero, a company that makes these types of in-car devices, says all technologies have trade-offs., The analogy I give is when we were all kids, Ferrick says. If your mother said to you, 'You're going to go out right now [and] I'm going to put this thing in your hand, which [means] at any second I can call you, and you have to pick up the phone,' I would say, 'I don't want it.' , Just like the cellphone took away some freedoms, Ferrick says, drivers will lose some freedom as technology advances., I can save you some pretty serious dollars on your premium, he says. Are you willing to sacrifice, knowing that somebody is not watching where you drive, necessarily, but how that car is being driven?, Thus far, only a small fraction of drivers have installed the tracking devices in their cars. For its part, the industry says tracking is the way of the future and giving up freedom is the only way to save money.
Gibson guitars on sale in New York City., Gibson guitars on sale in New York City., After years maintaining innocence, as Nashville Public Radio says, Gibson Guitar Corp. has agreed to pay a $300,000 penalty, donate $50,000 to a conservation fund and give up its claims to ebony and rosewood worth nearly $262,000 to avoid being criminally prosecuted for importing exotic woods., NPR's Carrie Johnson tells our Newscast Desk that it's a crime to bring endangered plants and wood into the U.S. if the materials are protected under the laws of other countries. Under the terms of a deal announced today by the Justice Department, Gibson also promises to beef up its compliance programs., The Justice Department's moves against Gibson in 2011, which included a raid on the company's factory and seizure of some ebony and rosewood, turned the guitar company into the poster child for the Republican Party's campaign against burdensome regulations, as The Hill has written. Gibson hired lobbyists to make its case on Capitol Hill., In a statement, Justice says:, In light of Gibson's acknowledgement of its conduct, its duties under the Lacey Act and its promised cooperation and remedial actions, the government will decline charging Gibson criminally in connection with Gibson's order, purchase or importation of ebony from Madagascar and ebony and rosewood from India, provided that Gibson fully carries out its obligations under the agreement, and commits no future violations of law, including Lacey Act violations.
by Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele, Hardcover, 256 pages | purchase, More on this book:, A lot is at stake in the current election, but no matter who wins, the victor will stay committed to policies that cripple the middle class. That's according to Pulitzer Prize-winning reporters Donald Barlett and James Steele, who've been covering the middle class for decades., In their new book, The Betrayal of the American Dream, Barlett and Steele criticize a government obsessed with free trade and indifferent toward companies that outsource jobs., Everyone loves Apple. Apple makes nothing in this country anymore, Barlett tells NPR's Steve Inskeep as an example. But then, look over here on the other side and you have Intel, and their plants are massive, and they are good-paying jobs. They continue to invest in this country. And what we need in this country now are more Intels and fewer Apples., For models of how to boost manufacturing and job growth in the U.S., Barlett and Steele look abroad. Germany has had a fairly good record in recent years, Steele says. When the global financial meltdown happened, Germany adopted a policy that subsidized companies in order to help them keep employees on the rolls. It's one of the reasons the German unemployment rate is much lower than in this country, he says., But are those German jobs good ones? The New York Times reported last year that German wages are relatively low, leaving many people unable to pay their bills. There's no doubt that this is true with some parts of the German workforce, Steele says. But he points out that German factory workers do considerably better than their American counterpoints in terms of wages and benefits., Barlett and Steele write that they'd like German-style government support for American companies that preserve jobs. They also recommend tariffs on countries that do business differently than the U.S. One of the real ironies in this time in history is that we will go to a shooting war at the drop of a hat, Barlett says. But suggest a trade policy that might result in a trade war and everybody runs screaming. That's nonsense., We're not suggesting putting up walls around the United States, Steele adds. But when an industry is threatened, when there's some bit of unfair competition, we need to respond, and we have never done that in any kind of systematic way. Every other country out there knows that, and as a result of that, they can continue to thumb their nose at our attempts to open those markets., Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele are the authors of America: What Went Wrong?, Donald L. Barlett and James B. Steele are the authors of America: What Went Wrong?, U.S. exports have been rising in recent years, but that hasn't had a big impact on our trade deficit; they're still outpaced by imports. Barlett and Steele say the media is responsible for incorrect perceptions that the trade deficit is shrinking. What you have to look at, though, is what the trend is, Steele says. And the trend is, year in and year out, that the trade deficit in other words, how imports overwhelm exports that trend has been going on now for three decades., Steele says most Americans don't realize that other countries don't have the kind of trade deficit that the U.S. does, and he links that deficit to the unemployment situation. That has led to the elimination of all kinds of jobs, and they've not been replaced by jobs paying commensurate pay., But what about people who say that it's too late; good manufacturing jobs are gone and they'll never come back? We're realists, Steele says. We don't think the likelihood of bringing many of those jobs back is possible. We think the best hope is to try to deal with the manufacturing we have left ... that will ultimately be very good for working Americans everywhere., Read an excerpt of The Betrayal of the American Dream
The Goo Goo Cluster, a classic gooey treat from Nashville, Tenn., celebrates its 100th birthday this year., The Goo Goo Cluster, a classic gooey treat from Nashville, Tenn., celebrates its 100th birthday this year., We're taking a cross-country tour of candies from around the U.S., sampling hometown sweets that deliver a nostalgic sugar rush., We rally around our regional candies, maybe because they take us back to a simpler, sweeter time., The family-owned Russel Sifers Candy Company has been making Valomilks, and only Valomilks, for decades., view series, Minnie Pearl and Roy Acuff perform in front of a Goo Goo Cluster advertisement at the Grand Ole Opry, circa 1976. Coincidentally, Pearl's 100th birthday is also in October., Minnie Pearl and Roy Acuff perform in front of a Goo Goo Cluster advertisement at the Grand Ole Opry, circa 1976. Coincidentally, Pearl's 100th birthday is also in October., No one's entirely sure where the Southern treat called the Goo Goo Cluster got its name., The iconic candy from Nashville, Tenn., celebrates its 100th birthday this year. The confection of marshmallow, peanuts and caramel wrapped in milk chocolate may owe its longevity in part to another Nashville icon: the Grand Ole Opry., Goo Goo Cluster sponsored the venue's radio broadcasts from 1966 until 2006. In one popular advertisement, stage performers crooned, Go get a Goo Goo ... it's gooooooood!, The gooey sweet was advertised so heavily on air through those decades that many people believed Goo was an acronym for Grand Ole Opry., While the true origins of the candy's name remain a mystery, one thing is certain: Goo Goo sales have tumbled in recent years while its manufacturer was focused on other products. Now, Standard Candy Co. is making a big effort to bring the gooey classic back., These days, Standard Candy is on the road, passing out free samples of its signature candy at events across the South. At a recent convention in Nashville, Vance Sensing stopped to grab a Goo Goo and re-live the taste of his childhood., My grandfather had a country store, and I worked for him a lot of weekends, Sensing said. For pay, he would always let me choose a candy and a Coke, and Goo Goo was one of 'em one of my favorites., Convention-goer Heather Cunningham, a 30-something mom with several kids in tow, also stopped for a taste of nostalgia. She hadn't eaten a Goo Goo in years, she said, but remembers how a family friend always had them handy., Whenever he would come around, he would always have Goo Goos, Cunningham said. And me and my twin sister prayed my mom would marry him, 'cause he was the candy man. He always had them candy, and we was like, 'Momma, you really need to marry this man!, In an effort to reach younger consumers, Standard's made a few changes in the kitchen. It has taken hydrogenated oils out of the recipe and greened the production process., Brand manager Lance Paine has even created an iPhone app called the Goo Goo Finder., You hit this button here, and up pops your location, Paine demonstrates. Then you'll see these different flags that are on the map, showing you where your closest Goo Goo retailer is., One thing Paine won't be changing is the candy bar's deep connection to the South., For whatever reason, there seems to be this sort of Southern food zeitgeist that's happening right now, Paine says. Everyone wants to be from the South.
A job recruiter talks with an unemployed man, at a job fair in San Jose, Calif., last week. The Labor Department reported Friday that employers added 163,000 net jobs last month but the unemployment rate rose to 8.3 percent., A job recruiter talks with an unemployed man, at a job fair in San Jose, Calif., last week. The Labor Department reported Friday that employers added 163,000 net jobs last month but the unemployment rate rose to 8.3 percent., The stock market rallied on Friday's jobs report, with the Dow Jones industrial average jumping more than 200 points. But what do the numbers mean for the political stocks of President Obama and his Republican challenger, Mitt Romney? That's harder to measure., In our increasingly polarized country, Democrats and Republicans can choose from competing news outlets, competing think tanks, and this month at least competing reports from the Labor Department., Speaking near the White House on Friday, President Obama focused on the employment survey, which showed better-than-expected job gains in July. He noted that over the last 2 1/2 years, private employers have added 4.5 million jobs more than a million this year alone., Those are our neighbors and family members finding work and the security that comes with work, Obama said., Romney, on the other hand, stressed the UNemployment rate, which inched up to 8.3 percent. At a campaign appearance in Las Vegas, Romney focused on the millions of Americans who've been unable to find full-time work., This continues a pattern of American families really struggling, having hard times, and the president's policies are to blame for not having gotten the economy back on track, Romney said., Forecasters were caught off guard both by the sharp jump in job growth and by the rise in the unemployment rate. But political handicapper Stuart Rothenberg of the Rothenberg Political Report doubts that either surprise was big enough to fundamentally change the political picture., Both sides have something to talk about with these numbers, he said. But overall, I'm not sure these numbers are so frightening to people that there is an added sense of doom out there., Polls continue to show a tight race nationally. But Rothenberg gives a tiny advantage &mdash;what he calls a pinky on the scale to Obama., Mitt Romney needs a growing sense of gloom about the economy, Rothenberg said. He needs a series of bad numbers that will lead people to conclude that ... we're really going off the cliff here. And to the extent that the news is mixed or good at all, I think that hurts Romney between now and November., For economist Nariman Behravesh, the new numbers simply confirm the impression of the last few months: that the economy is growing but at a very sluggish rate. His firm, IHS Global Insight, uses that information to try to forecast the presidential election. For now, he says, we're in a holding pattern., &ldquo; Both sides have something to talk about with these numbers. But overall, I'm not sure these numbers are so frightening to people that there is an added sense of doom out there., - Stuart Rothenberg of the Rothenberg Political Report, The economy is not bad enough to create a strong case against Mr. Obama, he said. But it's certainly not Obama's friend., In the months to come, the candidates will try to rally support for their competing economic platforms. Romney argues that the president's health care law and financial regulations have discouraged hiring. Romney has promised to reverse them., The president has not had policies that put American families back to work. I do. I'll put them in place and get America working again, Romney said., Romney's plan includes big tax cuts, more domestic energy production and deeper cuts in government spending. Another 9,000 government jobs were shed last month, including about 7,000 teaching positions. , Obama wants to spend more money keeping teachers on the payroll and boosting public works projects to employ out-of-work construction crews. He argues that Romney's tax proposal would shift the burden to the middle class a claim supported this week by the nonpartisan Tax Policy Center. Obama calls Romney's proposals a rerun of trickle-down economics., We're not going to get to where we need to be if we go back to the policies that helped to create this mess in the first place, Obama said. And the last thing that we should be doing is asking middle-class families who are still struggling to recover from this recession to pay more in taxes., Expect to hear a lot more of these arguments in the next three months. Of course, polls tell us most voters have already made up their minds about the presidential race and that's the filter through which many will view the latest jobs report.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics keeps monthly unemployment figures very safe., The Bureau of Labor Statistics keeps monthly unemployment figures very safe., The monthly jobs numbers are important really important. They tell everyone from manufacturers to stock traders how the economy is doing. Billions of dollars ride on the jobs numbers., Get them early, and you'd have everything you need to make a quick fortune. And once just once, as far as anyone knows someone did get them early., On today's show, we talk to the guy who got the numbers before everyone else. And we learn the crazy lengths the government now goes to in order to keep those numbers secret until it's time to release them., Download the Planet Money iPhone App. Music: Walk The Moon's Anna Sun. Find us: Twitter/ Facebook/ Spotify/ Tumblr.
(Revised @ 1:48 pm ET), With only three monthly jobs reports left before Nov. 6, President Obama needs every piece of good economic news he can get to add to his argument for re-election., Friday's employment report certainly provided some. The Labor Department reported that the economy added an unexpectedly strong 163,000 jobs in July. Forecasters had predicted that the economy would add as many as 100,000 jobs, so the report took most everyone by surprise., But the Labor Department also reported that the jobless rate rose slightly to 8.3 percent from 8.2 percent. Statistically, that 10th of a percent didn't mean much, according to the Labor Department., Politically, however, it was significant, since the uptick allowed the president's opponents, particularly Republican rival Mitt Romney, to continue his argument that Obama has failed to turn around the economy and has no idea how to do so., In short, the report maintained the status quo of the presidential race. It suggested that the economic recovery was still intact, though weaker than any recovery since World War II., The upside wasn't so big as to have Democrats whistling Happy Days Are Here Again, nor the downside so bad as to make Republicans ever more confident of a Romney victory in November., James Thurber, director of the Center for Congressional &amp; Presidential Studies, at American University, told It's All Politics:, It certainly doesn't hurt Obama on the economy. It doesn't blow things away. But he's doing pretty well in the polls in several battleground states that are adding jobs, where unemployment rates are going down, like in Ohio., So this isn't super news but it's good news for Obama. And not so good news for Mitt Romney. It would have been better [for Obama] if they had created even more jobs, but that's quite a few jobs., With the election less than 100 days away now, voter perceptions of the economy are pretty much baked in, with only a small percent of the electorate still persuadable, according to Thurber. And the closer Election Day gets, the fewer voters will be in that group, with perhaps only 10 percent to 12 percent of voters still open to persuasion 30 days before the election, Thurber said., Thurber adds:, So all these billions of dollars being spent are being spent on those people in those battleground states. A dramatic change in the economy, an improvement might change that slightly. And certainly if it gets negative dramatically, that could change it a little bit., But basically [a 10th of percentage point change in the jobless rate] is not going to make that much of a difference in that swing vote, in my opinion., Thurber cites the presidential election forecast models by political scientists like Alan Abramowitz at Emory University and others, like Nate Silver of the New York Times' FiveThirtyEight blog, which show Obama with a better than even chance for re-election based on economic data., Thurber's point: It would take a game changer of an event to really change the dynamics of those models. And Friday's jobs report was not a game-changer event., Not only are voter attitudes mostly baked in at his point, so are the presidential candidates and their campaigns, both of which sounded themes heard well before Friday., Speaking at an event at the White House, President Obama said:, This morning, we learned that our businesses created 172,000 new jobs in the month of July. That means that we've now created 4.5 million new jobs over the last 29 months and 1.1 million new jobs so far this year. Those are our neighbors and family members finding work, and the security that comes with work., But let's acknowledge, we've still got too many folks out there who are looking for work. We've got more work to do on their behalf not only to reclaim all the jobs that were lost during the recession, but also to reclaim the kind of financial security that too many Americans have felt was slipping away from them for too long., And we knew when I started in this job that this was going to take some time. We haven't had to come back from an economic crisis this deep or this painful since the 1930s. But we also knew that if we were persistent, if we kept at it and kept working, that we'd gradually get to where we need to be., Here's the thing. We are not going to get there, we're not going to get to where we need to be if we go back to the policies that helped to create this mess in the first place. And the last thing that we should be doing is asking middle-class families who are still struggling to recover from this recession to pay more in taxes., Romney's campaign issued the following statement, quoting him:, Today's increase in the unemployment rate is a hammer blow to struggling middle-class families. Yesterday I launched my Plan for a Stronger Middle Class that will bring more jobs and more take home pay. My plan will turn things around and bring the economy roaring back, with twelve million new jobs created by the end of my first term. President Obama doesn't have a plan and believes that the private sector is 'doing fine.' Obviously, that is not the case. We've now gone 42 consecutive months with the unemployment rate above eight percent. Middle class Americans deserve better, and I believe America can do better., By the way, Jim Tankersley, who covers the intersection of economics and politics for National Journal, has a piece that raises an important point. The nation has for more than a decade witnessed repeated jobless recoveries., There are structural reasons for this, as the economy has changed through offshoring and technology. But, as Tankersley points out, neither candidate is talking much, if at all, about any of this.
Everyone (including us) is saying this morning that the U.S. economy gained 163,000 jobs last month. Strictly speaking, this is a lie., In fact, the U.S. economy actually lost 1.2 million jobs last month. There were 134.1 million jobs in June, and 132.9 million jobs in July. (The numbers are in this PDF.), Why the massive gap between the number everybody is reporting and the actual number?, There are huge seasonal fluctuations in employment that occur in a predictable way, year after year. Retailers staff up before Christmas, and lay people off in January. Public school districts staff up in the fall and let people go in July, after the school year ends., To account for this, the government releases seasonally adjusted jobs numbers every month. The basic idea is to correct for these predictable fluctuations., So in months when it's typical for employers to add tons of workers, the seasonally adjusted number will be much lower than the actual number. And in months like July, when it's typical to cut tons of workers, the seasonally adjusted number will be much higher., Fair enough., But as the NYT's Economix blog notes, Some economists believe economic turbulence has disrupted the calibration of those adjustments, undermining the accuracy of the bureau's estimates., That worry is particularly relevant for months like July, where the seasonal adjustment tends to be especially large., Over time, the monthly jobs numbers provide a solid picture of employment in America. But there are lots of reasons to be cautious about reading too much into any one month.
A sign pointing the way to a career fair in San Mateo, Calif., last month., A sign pointing the way to a career fair in San Mateo, Calif., last month., There were 163,000 more jobs on public and private payrolls last month, but the nation's unemployment rate edged up to 8.3 percent, the Bureau of Labor Statistics just reported., The jobs gain was the best in five months and was much better than the revised estimated of growth for June a gain of just 64,000 jobs. But it wasn't good enough to keep the jobless rate from rising slightly. In June, it stood at 8.2 percent., We'll have more from the report, reactions to it and analyses as the morning continues. Click your refresh button to make sure you're seeing our latest updates., Update at 12:05 p.m. ET. Obama Focuses On Gains, Talks Taxes:, Speaking at the White House, the president just started his remarks by noting that private employers have added 4.5 million jobs to their payrolls over the last 29 months. Those are our neighbors and family members finding new work, he said, while conceding that we've still got too many folks out there who are looking for work., Then he turned to again calling on Congress to extend the so-called Bush tax cuts for all Americans except those families earning more than $250,000 a year. Republicans have said they want to extend the cuts for everyone. They say that a still struggling economy could be hurt by effectively raising anyone's taxes. The president and his fellow Democrats say it's time to ask wealthy Americans to pay more as part of an effort to help trip future deficits., Update at 11:58 a.m. ET. Romney Says Real People Are Suffering:, After repeating his earlier line about unemployment being a hammer blow to the struggling middle-class families of America,' Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney just told an audience in Las Vegas that real people [are] really suffering and having hard times in America today. He blamed what he says are the president's failed economic policies., If he's elected, Romney said, he will put in place policies that get America working again. (Our thanks to CNN.com, which streamed Romney's remarks.), Update at 11:40 a.m. ET. Obama, Romney To Speak:, The president is about to make comments about the report and to make his case about not extending the so-called Bush tax cuts for those earning more than $250,000 a year. And Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney is due to speak shortly at an event in Las Vegas., Update at 10 a.m. ET. Stocks Are Up:, Wall Street seems to be taking the news well. The Dow Jones industrial average is up about 210 points (1.7 percent) after 30 minutes of trading., Update at 9:50 a.m. ET. Romney Says It's A Hammer Blow, White House Sees Positive Side:, As we reported earlier, Republican presidential contender Mitt Romney called the increase in unemployment a hammer blow to struggling middle-class families., Now, White House economist Alan Krueger is out with his analysisand he begins by saying that while there is more work that remains to be done, today's employment report provides further evidence that the U.S. economy is continuing to recover from the worst downturn since the Great Depression. He adds that the economy has now added private sector jobs for 29 straight months, for a total of 4.5 million jobs during that period., Republicans such as House Speaker John Boehner, however, point out that the jobless rate has been above 8 percent for 42 months., Through July, President Obama has been in office for 42 months., Update at 9:30 a.m. ET. Taken A Little Further, Change In Jobless Rate Is Even Smaller:, Crunching the numbers shows that the jobless rate last month was 8.25 percent if you carry it out another place vs. 8.22 percent in June. That helps explain why BLS says the rate was essentially unchanged., Update at 9:20 a.m. ET. Politically, Report Cuts Both Ways., The Associated Press writes that:, President Barack Obama got new figures Friday to buttress his argument that he's presiding over steady, if slow, economic growth. But the government's report that the overall rate of unemployment actually crept up to 8.3 percent allows Republican rival Mitt Romney to keep pressure on Obama to defend his record., CBS News' Mark Knoller says Romney has characterized the rise in the jobless rate as being a hammer blow to struggling middle-class families., Update at 9:10 a.m. ET. About 7 Million Have Been Out Of Work A Long Time:, In July there were 6.9 million people who had been unemployed 15 weeks or longer, BLS says. That was down from 7.2 million in June., Update at 9:05 a.m. ET. Where The Gains Were:, The sector with the biggest increase in jobs 49,000 was professional and business services, BLS says. That sector includes jobs in the legal profession, accounting, computer systems, temporary help and administration., The education and health services sectors added 38,000 jobs., Restaurants and drinking places increased employment by 29,400 positions., There was a 25,000-increase in the manufacturing sector., Update at 9:03 a.m. ET. A Good Number:, This is a good number, it's well above expectations, economist Hugh Johnson tells our Newscast Desk, referring to the jobs increase., Update at 9 a.m. ET. Republican Reaction:, Last week Obama said his jobs plan worked. With unemployment going up yet again, it's obvious it hasn't &amp; he's out of ideas, tweets Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus., Update at 8:55 a.m. ET. Some Early Analyses:, &mdash; The latest payroll numbers are encouraging after three months of weak job creation, but the figures still aren't enough to lower the unemployment rate, and hiring remains well below the pace set at the start of the year. (The Wall Street Journal), &mdash; Uneven hiring may hold back consumer spending, the biggest part of the economy, as a global slowdown and impending U.S. tax changes weigh on businesses. (Bloomberg News), &mdash; Though job growth picked up, the increase in the unemployment rate means that investors will still be anticipating some type of move by the Federal Reserve to give the economy a boost. (Reuters), Update at 8:52 a.m. ET. News Was Basically Better Than Expected:, As we reported earlier, economists had expected to hear that 100,000 jobs were added to payrolls. They also thought BLS would say the jobless rate had remained 8.2 percent., Update at 8:48 a.m. ET. Fewer Discouraged Workers:, One reason the unemployment rate can rise even as more jobs are added to payrolls is that if more people decide to start looking for work again that adds to the size of the labor force. One way to measure that type of change is to look at discouraged workers those who aren't looking for jobs because they don't think there are any to find., According to BLS, there were 852,000 discouraged workers in July, a decline of 267,000 from a year earlier. That could be a sign of increased optimism about the labor market., Update at 8:42 a.m. ET. Job Growth Averaging Around 150,000 A Month:, According to BLS, since the beginning of this year, employment growth has averaged 151,000 per month, about the same as the average monthly gain of 153,000 in 2011., At that pace, however, there aren't enough new jobs being added to bring down the unemployment rate. It has stayed in a narrow range from 8.1 percent to 8.3 percent this year. The rate recently peaked at 10 percent in October 2009. It hasn't been below 8 percent since January 2009., Update at 8:38 a.m. ET. June Jobs Gain Revised Down:, When BLS first reported about the month of June, it estimated there had been 80,000 jobs added to payrolls. Now, it puts the gain that month at 64,000.
U.S. employers added 114,000 jobs in September, the Labor Department reports. And the unemployment rate fell to 7.8 percent, marking the first time since President Obama took the oath of office in January 2009 that the U.S. jobless rate is under 8 percent.
Update at 8:45 a.m. ET. Report Has Better Than Expected News:, 163,000 Jobs Added In July; Unemployment Rate Rose To 8.3 Percent, Our original post:, Here's what economists surveyed by Reuters and Bloomberg News expect to hear at 8:30 a.m. ET when the Bureau of Labor Statistics releases figures on the July unemployment rate and employment growth:, &mdash; Just 100,000 jobs were added to payrolls last month. That would be better than the initial estimate of an 80,000 gain in June, but well below the pace of earlier this year and not enough to bring down unemployment., &mdash; Which is why they're saying the jobless rate probably remained at 8.2 percent. It's been above 8 percent since February 2009., We'll be posting about the news from the report once it's released. Check back with us just after 8:30 a.m. ET., Related stories:, &mdash; Five Issues To Watch For In Jobs Report. (The Wall Street Journal's Real Time Econmics blog), -- Beware The Jobs Report Of July. (The New York Times' Economix blog), &mdash; Stocks Rebound As Focus Turns To U.S. Jobs. (The Financial Times), &mdash; U.S. Jobs Seen Weak In July, May Help Push Federal Reserve To Act. (The Economic Times), &mdash; Keeping The Biggest Secret In The U.S. Economy. (Planet Money)
In one part of the BLS offices, a supervisor rings this bell to let employees know that it is officially 8:30 AM., In one part of the BLS offices, a supervisor rings this bell to let employees know that it is officially 8:30 AM., The single most important number in the U.S. economy comes out on the first Friday of each month at 8:30 a.m. That's when the government reports how many jobs were added or gained in the previous month., The number moves markets, and economists and traders around the world wait anxiously to see what it will be. If you found out early what the number was going to be, you could make a fortune., The government knows this, of course, and officials take extreme precautions to make sure that no one finds out early., I visited the Bureau of Labor Statistics recently and talked to Megan Barker, an economist who works on the jobs report. But I couldn't visit her office: Unless you have business inside Barker's office, there is no getting in., The maintenance crew doesn't collect trash in the days leading up to a release. The IT department is also kept away. Computer problems? Tough luck., So what exactly is going on that's so top secret? Inside, economists are sifting through data from thousands of employers and people around the country. Each month, the BLS surveys about 140,000 businesses and government agencies., Don't even think about asking these economists who's on the list. They won't say., The end result are the numbers that tell us how many jobs the U.S. economy added or lost the previous month the number Wall Street is watching so closely., Barker and a handful of other people know it by Tuesday but they are under strict rules not to tell anyone., We keep it very secret, Barker says. I know my parents ask me every Tuesday, 'So what do you think?' And I'm like, 'Well, what do you think?' So I even have to be secretive with my parents., Barker and her colleagues have to keep this secret until 8:30 a.m. on the day of the release., Journalists standing by at the Labor Department get the numbers a half hour early, but they can't talk about them until precisely 8:30 a.m., That can mean waiting through several long seconds of dead air, as CNBC's Hampton Pearson did during December's release., CNBC's Hampton Pearson waits for the bell.
Honda's CNG Civic is the only natural gas-fueled sedan currently available in the United States. With so few CNG passenger cars on the road, pumping stations are few and far between., Honda's CNG Civic is the only natural gas-fueled sedan currently available in the United States. With so few CNG passenger cars on the road, pumping stations are few and far between., More than 20 state governors are taking an unusual step to boost the natural gas vehicle industry. Independent of the federal government, they're asking Detroit carmakers to build them a new kind of car: a midsize sedan that runs on compressed natural gas instead of gasoline., The governors are hoping to boost demand for natural gas cars with their collective buying power. Combined, the states say they could ultimately buy thousands of CNG vehicles to replace their current vehicle fleets if those cars were available., Only a few kinds of vehicles currently run on compressed natural gas in the U.S., and only one, the CNG Honda Civic, is a passenger car. Detroit currently offers no natural gas-fueled passenger cars., Filling up a natural gas car's fuel tank is a cinch if you live in the right place. Ann Arbor, Mich., for example, has two natural gas pumps. But that kind of infrastructure is unusual in the vast majority of U.S. cities., Playing Catch Up, Colorado Gov. John Hickenlooper is among the governors supporting the effort. Compressed natural gas, he says, is good for the environment and for the U.S. economy., Natural gas emits half the pollutants that come out of traditional gasoline, Hickenlooper says. It's way less expensive probably $2 per gallon equivalent less expensive right now than burning regular gasoline. And it creates all the jobs here we don't [have to] send billions of dollars to foreign dictatorships., Dodge currently offers a CNG-fueled truck. A group of state governors hope Detroit will soon build CNG sedans, as well., Dodge currently offers a CNG-fueled truck. A group of state governors hope Detroit will soon build CNG sedans, as well., Domestically produced natural gas is abundant now, thanks to controversial advances in gas drilling known as hydraulic fracturing, or fracking., And while the federal government has spent billions in stimulus dollars to boost electric cars, little of those funds went to natural gas, says Kathryn Clay, executive director of the Drive Natural Gas Initiative, a consortium of natural gas producers and distributors., We peaked a little bit too late, Clay says. When those federal funds were being divvied up, she says, the industry was still figuring out how much gas would become newly accessible due to fracking., Now the industry knows how much may be available and it's a lot. Enough to last for a century, according to some analysts., Clay says that means our entire energy landscape as a country has changed., Expensive ... For Now, Private companies with big fleets of gasoline-hungry trucks have already asked automakers in Detroit to build versions that run on cheaper natural gas., Chrysler has responded with the 2500 Ram heavy-duty truck. It runs on CNG, but has a backup gasoline tank in case drivers can't find a natural gas pump. It also has two natural gas tanks taking up some of the space in the truck bed., That's the one difficulty of a CNG, says Chrysler engineer Michael Cairns. You need to package fairly large tanks to be able to have a reasonable range., And those tanks help make these vehicles expensive. This Ram truck costs $10,000 more than a gasoline version, and the CNG Civic costs $4,000 more than a gasoline model., But Cairns says with enough demand, the costs will go down., It has to be engineered properly, Cairns says, but we know how to do this., Fuel Abundant, But Demand Lags, No car companies have disclosed if they plan to bid on the governors' proposal. Honda and Chrysler could have an edge if they do Honda because of its existing CNG Civic, and Chrysler, because its partner Fiat builds CNG passenger cars in Europe., But car companies are loathe to start new car programs unless they know the demand will be there., Oklahoma Gov. Mary Fallin says it will. The governors extended a request for proposals to car manufacturers to develop the cars in late July. And Fallin says participating states will encourage their cities, universities and private companies to buy the vehicles, too., We're serious about this, she says. We hope to have those proposals and make some awards by October. So this is a real deal., Early efforts to market CNG cars to U.S. consumers flopped, so natural gas producers have a lot to gain if the effort to jump-start the industry drives up demand for the gas., One of North America's largest natural gas producers, Encana, recently announced a huge loss, because gas supply is now far outstripping demand.
U.S. employment is stalled, growth is anemic, and the Federal Reserve has decided not to take action for at least another month., Most economists weren't expecting the Federal Open Markets Committee, which sets the Fed's monetary policy, to announce another round of quantitative easing a fancy term that basically means the central bank buys bonds to increase the money supply and make borrowing cheaper at this week's meeting. Still, that's exactly what a number of them think is needed., And it's not as though Congress is riding to the economy's rescue. What hopes we might have had of that happening are rapidly vanishing the closer we get to November's election., But what if politics were no issue? NPR asked four economists to dream a little. In a world where they could set aside Washington's partisanship and do one thing to fix what they see as the economy's biggest problem what would it be?, Here's what they said:, Jared Bernstein, senior fellow at the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, The problem: Private-sector job creation can't keep pace with public-sector layoffs., The solution: Provide a stimulus plan for state and local governments so they have the money to hire., Those public-sector jobs are important to communities. They're teachers, firefighters and police, folks that maintain water and sanitation systems, Bernstein says. So, there's lots of good reasons to think temporary employment measures at the state and local level will help pick up some of the slack from the economy., (Caveat: The federal money has to come from somewhere, he notes. It will mean a temporarily higher budget deficit for the federal government.), Aparna Mathur, resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, The problem: Job creation, The solution: Tax cuts, We need to extend the Bush tax cuts for all income groups, including the highest, Mathur says. If you look at the distribution of small-business owners and people who are earning more than $250,000, they are the ones creating the jobs., We also need more certainty about the corporate tax. At the very least, we need to lower the top marginal tax rate, she says., (Caveat: In the short run, she adds, the lost tax revenues could increase the deficit.), Barry Bosworth, senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, The problem: Our yawning trade imbalance, The solution: Devalue the dollar to stimulate exports, American companies do extremely well in the global market, but they don't make anything here, they make everything overseas, Bosworth says. We need to have an export stimulus. That's what every country I know of that's gone through these financial crises has done. They export., To accomplish that, he says, we need a lower exchange rate on the dollar. A capital transaction tax [on financial transactions] and controls on capital inflows would help, Bosworth says., (Caveat: With Europe in the tank, everybody wants dollars as a safe haven, he says. And that tends to drive up the exchange rate.), Dean Baker, co-director of the Center for Economic and Policy Research, The problem: Consumers lack purchasing power., The solution: Raise the minimum wage., Raising the minimum wage gives some boost because you're giving purchasing power to lower-income workers who are likely to spend virtually all these are people who are living paycheck to paycheck, Baker says., (Caveat: Even if the minimum wage were raised by $2 an hour, he says, it would mean only about $2,000 more a year in workers' pockets. And some of the advantage would be offset by firms charging more for their products and services to make up for higher wages.)
Emily Macri looks over a college brochure with her mother, Maureen O'Brien, in Kingman, Ariz. Macri is transferring to Northern Arizona University so that she can pay in-state tuition., Emily Macri looks over a college brochure with her mother, Maureen O'Brien, in Kingman, Ariz. Macri is transferring to Northern Arizona University so that she can pay in-state tuition., Maureen O'Brien told her daughter Emily Macri: dream big., She could pick any college she wanted and they would figure out a way to pay for it., Macri chose the University of Vermont, which costs more than $49,000 in tuition and fees per year for out-of-state residents., O'Brien and her daughter co-signed a private student loan from Sallie Mae for $24,000 and a $30,000 Parent PLUS loan, a federal loan program for parents. And that was just for Macri's first two years of college., That was one of the compelling reasons why I asked her to consider coming to a state school here in Arizona, O'Brien says. I just couldn't keep doing that. And with my son going to college, too, I can't do that for two kids., Using savings, income and loans, students paid 30 percent of the total bill for college, up from 24 percent four years ago, according to a recent study. Parents covered 37 percent of the cost, down from 45 percent four years earlier., Source: Sallie Mae, Ipsos, Credit: Angela Wong / NPR, A recent study by the research group Ipsos and the student loan giant, Sallie Mae, shows that approximately 70 percent of families are eliminating college choices based on cost. More students are also now choosing to enroll in community colleges, which is often the most affordable option., This fall, Emily will be a transfer student at Northern Arizona University, which costs only about a third of the cost of the University of Vermont., Her younger brother, Casey, will be starting as a freshman at Arizona State University, which costs about the same as Northern Arizona., The family is expecting to borrow an additional $70,000 to pay for Emily's last two years of college and Casey's next four., Emily says leaving the East Coast and having to transfer is tough., I loved it and it is a shame that I can't go back again in the fall, she says. But then again, I have to look on the bright side of things, I'll be saving a lot of money., She tried to offset college expenses by working part time. And this summer, she's working as a cashier at a frozen yogurt shop., She says she's determined to finish her degree in environmental studies., &ldquo; I can't afford to go to college, but I'm taking out loans, I'm putting my foot forward and making sure I get an education so that I can get a really good job in the long run., - Emily Macri, college junior , I can't afford to go to college, but I'm taking out loans, I'm putting my foot forward and making sure I get an education so that I can get a really good job in the long run, Emily says., Growing Debt, O'Brien isn't just helping finance her daughter's education, she's also juggling her own student loan debt., In 2004, after her job at a technology company was outsourced to India, she decided to go back to school. She enrolled in a physician's assistant program at the Rochester Institute of Technology where she had to take out more than $60,000 in loans., But her salary as a physician's assistant in upstate New York wasn't enough for her to make the monthly loan payments. Her home was facing foreclosure so she sold it and moved out to Kingman, Ariz., with her son., She was hoping to enroll in a loan forgiveness program by moving to an underserved region of the country, but she later found out that she was disqualified because she is working as a specialist in urology., She is paid well now with a salary of $93,000 a year. Still, more than a third of her take-home pay goes toward paying off student loans., There's a feeling of satisfaction you get when you help people medically that you didn't get when you're working at a help desk or working at a cubicle, O'Brien says. But at the same time, I think I've maybe mortgaged my future in ways that I couldn't have imagined when I went back to school., She has no savings, no money put away for retirement and is thinking of taking on a second job to pay off her kids' loans., And she even has a little bit to pay off in student loans from her first degree from 1996., Despite her family's growing student loan debt, O'Brien still believes in the value of a college education. She says it was her first degree in French and international studies that taught her how to think critically. And she wants the same for her kids., The Promise Of College, Steven Maack, an English teacher at East High in Wichita, Kan., says he feels the same way. He and his wife make $110,000 a year. Ever since their daughter, Eden Maack, was born, they've been saving for college with help from grandparents. They've saved $16,000 so far but that will soon disappear., In order to get her through the first year, we'll have to spend all the money we've saved, Steven Maack says. It's conceivable for years two, three or four we'll have to borrow quite a significant amount., Eden will be starting as a freshman at her first-choice school, Beloit College, in Wisconsin in a few weeks. It's also the school that offered her the best financial aid., Beloit costs about $46,000 per year for both in-state and out-of-state students. Eden earned a $20,000 presidential scholarship and grants from the school, which will cover about half the cost each year, but her family will still have to take out more than $5,000 in loans to pay for her first year of college., And once her parents' savings are spent on funding her freshman year, they'll have to think about how to fund her next three years of college., For the Maacks, it's a family affair. Steven Maack says his parents paid for his undergraduate education many decades ago under the condition that he would one day pay for his children's. Eden will also try to take on a campus job to help with costs, but her main job is to finish school., It's my responsibility to finish college and make their burden worthwhile, Eden says., Eden also has a sister just two years behind her and says that if she ever has kids, she knows her obligation is to one day pay for their college educations.
A big recall to tell you about today: Toyota has issued a voluntary recall of 2006 to early 2011 RAV4s and 2010 Lexus HS 250h vehicles sold in the United States., That's about 760,000 RAV4s and 18,000 Lexus vehicles., In a press release, Toyota said:, Toyota has determined that if the nuts on the rear suspension arm are not tightened following the proper procedure and torque specification during a rear wheel alignment service, excessive play may occur at the threaded portion of the arm, followed by rust formation. If this were to occur, the threaded portion of the rear suspension arm may wear and cause the arm to separate., Toyota has a website in which you can check your VIN number to see if your vehicle is affected.
The line stretched into the parking lot today at a Chick-fil-A restaurant in Wichita, Kan., The line stretched into the parking lot today at a Chick-fil-A restaurant in Wichita, Kan., The call from conservatives such as former Republican presidential candidates Mike Huckabee and Rick Santorum to short support for Chick-fil-A and company President Dan Cathy's stand against same-sex marriage has produced long lines at the fast-food chain's restaurants today, judging from news reports:, &mdash; Chick-fil-A restaurants across Tarrant County [Texas] and the nation were overrun with customers today, Fort Worth's Star-Telegram writes. At the restaurant on West 7th Street in Fort Worth, customers were jammed inside and vehicles wrapped about the building at lunchtime., &mdash; Hundreds of people participating in a national effort to support the fast food chain Chick-fil-A are gathered at its only Wisconsin restaurant, in Racine's Regency Mall, Wednesday, says Milwaukee's Journal Sentinel., &mdash; Local Chick-fil-A supporters flocked to its Indian River Road location and others today to participate in an unofficial 'appreciation day' for the chicken chain, reports Virginia Beach's Pilot Online. By 11:15 a.m., cars had lined up on Indian River Road, near Kempsville Road, to get into restaurant's parking lot. Most of the tables inside were occupied by diners before noon, and more than 30 customers waited to order., The Associated Press adds that a spokeswoman for the Rev. Billy Graham says the 93-year-old evangelist ate a Chick-fil-A lunch, including a chicken sandwich and waffle fries, at his North Carolina home., Meanwhile, says U.S. News, the show of support prompted opposing events all across the country staged by supporters of gay marriage and animal-rights advocates. Gay rights group GLAAD scheduled National Same-Sex Kiss Day, also known as Kiss Mor Chiks day, for Aug. 3. People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals planned to stage protests at Chick-fil-A locations nationwide for both the its gay marriage stance and its treatment of chickens.
While it does indeed appear that economic activity decelerated somewhat over the first half of this year, the Federal Reserve also said in its policy statement this afternoon that it is not as of yet taking any news steps to give the economy a boost., It plans to keep its target range for a key short-term interest rate at zero to 1/4 percent and will continue through the end of the year its program to extend the average maturity of its holdings of securities. That's an effort to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates by swapping $667 billion of short-term debt with longer-term securities to lengthen the average maturity of its holdings, an action dubbed Operation Twist, as Bloomberg News writes., The Associated Press says that stocks turned lower Wednesday afternoon after the Federal Reserve decided against taking any new steps to pump money into the economy. As Reuters adds, the central bank dashed expectations among some investors by taking no new measures., While noting the slowing, the Fed did also say it expects economic growth to remain moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up very gradually. It will closely monitor incoming information on economic and financial developments and will provide additional accommodation as needed to promote a stronger economic recovery and sustained improvement in labor market conditions in a context of price stability.
Three years into the economic recovery, the unemployment rate is still disastrously high. So today's big economic question is whether the Federal Reserve will announce new measures to bring down unemployment when it releases its policy statement this afternoon., Update: The new statement is out. The Fed isn't doing anything new right now., Over the past few years, the unemployment rate has followed a pretty clear pattern: It goes down a little bit, and then it stalls. Then it goes down a little more, and then it stalls again. As a result, unemployment declines very, very slowly. Lately, the rate has been stalled at just over 8 percent., When you look back over the Fed's big statements from the past few years, you see this pattern very clearly: The Fed keeps thinking the jobs picture is improving and the jobs picture keeps being grim., It happened in 2010., June 2010. Unemployment rate: 9.4 percent. Fed statement:, ...the labor market is improving gradually. ..., August 2010. Unemployment rate: 9.6 percent., ...the pace of recovery in ... employment has slowed in recent months., It happened again in 2011. Unemployment had fallen from the previous year but only a little, and the decline was partly due to people giving up on finding a job., March 2011. Unemployment rate: 8.9 percent., ...overall conditions in the labor market appear to be improving gradually., August 2011. Unemployment rate: 9.1 percent., Indicators suggest a deterioration in overall labor market conditions in recent months, and the unemployment rate has moved up., And it's happening again this year (and, again, some of the decline in the unemployment rate is due to people giving up and leaving the labor force, rather than people finding jobs)., March 2012. Unemployment rate: 8.2 percent., Labor market conditions have improved further; the unemployment rate has declined notably in recent months but remains elevated., June 2012. Unemployment rate: 8.2 percent., ...growth in employment has slowed in recent months, and the unemployment rate remains elevated, Update: Minimal change since June when it comes to discussing employment., August 2012. July unemployment rate will be updated Friday., Growth in employment has been slow in recent months, and the unemployment rate remains elevated.
Have you ever wondered who else is out there applying for the jobs you want?, Have you ever wondered who else is out there applying for the jobs you want?, Eric Auld wants a full-time job. He completed a master's program in 2009 and has a part-time job as an adjunct lecturer, but that provides barely enough to cover the bills., After a fruitless job search endlessly scanning Monster.com and Craigslist and tweaking resumes and cover letters he grew more curious about his competitors. So he created a fake Craigslist ad for an administrative assistant position and, in one day, received 653 responses from applicants with a wide range of education and experience. He wrote about what he learned from the applicants for Thought Catalog., I usually apply to two types of jobs, the first being teaching positions or publishing positions or any position I can use my master's in English for, Auld tells NPR's Neal Conan, and those other jobs being those lower-end, entry-level kind of positions that everybody seems to be applying for nowadays., Auld estimates that out of 100 jobs he applied for in the course of a month, he heard back from 5 percent. And actually, he says, most of the 5 percent I did hear from seem to be job scams trying to get my personal information., So he modeled his fake ad on those common, entry-level postings, and in just one day, was overwhelmed with applicants. As he sifted through resumes, he found that not many people with master's degrees were applying, but lots of them listed bachelor's degrees all of this for a $12- to $13-an-hour job in midtown Manhattan., He also found that the majority of applicants at least three-quarters had experience as administrative assistants. And the number that shocked him most? 10 percent ... had 10 or more years of experience, applying for this job that really, based on their previous experiences, seems to be ... beneath them., So, Auld learned, most of the applicants to these entry-level, administrative assistant positions really were more qualified than he is. And though some might warn him he's also not getting called back for starting positions because his advanced degree makes him overqualified, he's not concerned., With the state of the job market, it's just a cold fact that people with bachelor's degrees and master's degrees in all sorts of areas have to apply to these types of jobs, he says. I would give anything up including his part-time job as an adjunct lecturer to become a full-time administrative assistant, because those are guaranteed hours, and it's all year round.
August 1st will be another day that will destroy investor confidence just like the May 6th [2010] flash crash., That rather ominous sounding pronouncement comes from Joseph Saluzzi, co-head of equity trading at Themis Trading LLC in Chatham, N.J., in a Bloomberg News report about what happened early this morning on Wall Street., As The Wall Street Journal reports:, U.S. stock traders Wednesday grappled with a wave of orders that roiled the market and prompted exchanges to halt trading in some securities, raising concerns that another technology problem may dent investor confidence., The Associated Press writes that the New York Stock Exchange said it was reviewing trades in 140 stocks. Trading volume was unusually high in the first half-hour of trading, and some investors suspected technical glitches., According to Bloomberg:, The New York Stock Exchange and Knight Capital Group Inc. said they were investigating. Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber Co. rose more than 10 percent in the minutes after the 9:30 a.m. open in New York. Manitowoc Co. gained 14 percent, Pandora Media Inc. climbed almost 11 percent and Level 3 Communications Inc. plunged 15 percent before the swings narrowed minutes later, according to data compiled by Bloomberg., The Journal adds that:, Traders described unusual price swings in some stocks early in the trading session amid a large number of buy and sell orders blasted across electronic trading platforms. ..., Clients of Knight's trading services, including retail brokerage firms and institutions, were instructed to send their stock orders elsewhere due to technical problems, according to people involved in the situation. The system error and reports of irregular trading stoked suspicions that trades had been accidentally duplicated via computer algorithms, rather than the problem being contained to one server, as has happened in the past, traders said., As of this moment (12:45 p.m. ET), the overall market seems to be holding steady. The Dow Jones industrial average is up about 33 points, or 0.25 percent., Update at 3:55 p.m. ET. NYSE Cancels Trades For Six Stocks: , Bloomberg and The Wall Street Journal are reporting that the New York Stock Exchange is continuing its investigation, but has decided to cancel trades in six stocks., The Journal reports:, The six securities affected are Wizard Software Corp. (WZE), China Cord Blood Corp. (CO), Reaves Utility Income Fund (UTG), E-House (China) Holdings Ltd. (EJ), American Reprographics Co. (ARC) and Qicksilver Resources Inc. (KWK)., NYSE has determined to cancel all trades in the following six symbols, NYSE said in a trader notice. Trades executed 30% or more above or below the opening price today between 09:30:00 a.m. and 10:15:00 a.m. ET will be busted.
For a historic look at spending in America, see our post What America Buys. For more, see our Graphing America series., How do Americans spend their money? And how do budgets change across the income spectrum?, The graph below answers these questions. It shows average household spending patterns for U.S. households in three income categories one just below the poverty line, one at the middle of the income distribution and one at the top of the distribution., Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, Both the similarities and the differences are striking., Everyone devotes a huge chunk of their budget to housing, for example. Poor, middle class and rich families spend similar shares of their budgets on clothing and shoes, and on food outside the home., But poor families spend a much larger share of their budget on basic necessities such as food at home, utilities and health care. Rich families are able to devote a much bigger chunk of their spending to education, and a much, much bigger share to saving for retirement. (The retirement line includes contributions to Social Security and to private retirement plans, by the way.), The figures in the graph come from the Consumer Expenditure Survey, which has tons of data on spending patterns in the U.S., Correction: A previous version of this post incorrect numbers for spending on housing.
There was a 163,000-gain in the number of jobs on private payrolls in July, according to the latest ADP National Employment Report., That's down from an estimated 172,000 boost in June (a number revised slightly from ADP's previous report of a 176,000-increase for that month)., The ADP report sometimes gives at least an indication of what the Bureau of Labor Statistics will say in its widely watched monthly report on jobs and unemployment. We'll hear that agency's July estimates on Friday at 8:30 a.m. ET., But the two reports, based on different surveys, can also provide conflicting figures. ADP and BLS diverged on how things went in the labor market in June. While ADP pegged job growth at 170,000+, BLS said private employers added only 84,000 jobs to their payrolls that month., It's very possible we'll see a similar difference about July. Business Insider is predicting BLS will say there were 106,000 jobs added to payrolls last month and says the consensus on Wall Street is that BLS will put the figure at 100,000., But if ADP's July figures are accurate, the report would seem to be a sign that the job market was holding up entering the second half of the year, Bloomberg News says. And The Wall Street Journal notes that the gain was far above economists' median expectation of 108,000.
Chick-fil-A has been in the news lately, not because of its chicken sandwiches but thanks to comments by the fast food company's president opposing same-sex marriage., Social media helped spread the story and some of the country's mayors urged Chick-fil-A not to come to their cities. This led conservatives, including former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, to call for the public to support the chain on Wednesday by eating at one of its restaurants., Dan Cathy didn't realize the stir he would create when he spoke out against same-sex marriage to the Baptist Press and on the Ken Coleman radio show., I pray God's mercy on our generation that has such a prideful, arrogant attitude to think that we would have the audacity to try to redefine what marriage is all about, Cathy said during his interview with Coleman., Atlanta based Chick-fil-A is a private company founded in 1946, and has never hidden its Christian ties. Its 1,600 restaurants are closed on Sundays and the company president donates to several groups that oppose same sex marriage., City officials in Boston, Chicago, Philadelphia and San Francisco have criticized the comments and vowed to block Chick-fil-A from opening new restaurants in their towns. That drew reaction from Christian conservatives, such as Mike Huckabee who spoke out on behalf of Chick-fil-A., You know, if people don't like Chick-fil-A sandwiches, they certainly can decide to eat somewhere else, Huckabee said., The former Arkansas governor says Chick-fil-A's president has a right to his own personal beliefs., This is about a company that sells chicken and not politics, and they shouldn't be out of business because their owner happens to have a point of view that may not be the same as the gay activists, he said., So Huckabee made a nationwide call not to protest or picket but for people to eat at Chick-fil-A on Wednesday., On Tuesday, a Chick-fil-A restaurant in Roswell, Ga., got a long stream of cars throughout the lunch hour going through the drive-thru, and the parking lot was packed. In fact, it was overflow capacity., I love Chick-fil-A, says Bill Peterson, an executive recruiter, who was visiting the restaurant. I think it's a great organization. They've done a lot for Atlanta and the cities that they're in so I think very highly of the Cathy family and Chick-fil-A., Mike Abraham says he eats here often and, like Peterson, he backs the Chick-fil-A president., This is a free country, you could say whatever you want, he says. It's wrong to take it against his company so if we believe in the Constitution and freedom of speech, I don't think we have to make a big deal out of his comments., Chick-fil-A issued a statement saying the appreciation day was noy created by Chick-fil-A, but by its fans. The company says its goal is to have a positive influence on everyone who comes into contact with it., However, gay rights groups are not backing down. Aaron McQuade with the Gay and Lesbian Alliance Against Defamation says Dan Cathy does have the right to free speech, but comments have consequences., If you are going to exercise your free speech and say something that goes against the fabric of the community, the community is going to say something back to you, he says. And we've seen that in a giant dip in Chick-fil-A's approval numbers and people will vote at the dinner table and people will say 'We don't agree with you.', Some gay rights groups are keeping the pressure on: They plan to their hold own same-sex kiss day this Friday at Chick-fil-A restaurants.
'Morning Edition' executive producer Madhulika Sikka is back in her native Britain on vacation. And in contrast to what she's hearing from her American friends, the viewing choices there for the Olympics are staggering, she says., On its website, NBC reported the U.S. women's gymnastics team's gold medal Tuesday. But if you were watching on American TV, you had to wait until prime time to see the competition., On its website, NBC reported the U.S. women's gymnastics team's gold medal Tuesday. But if you were watching on American TV, you had to wait until prime time to see the competition., The 2012 Summer Olympics are in full swing. And there is one gold medal America wins without fail, every four years. It's for the sport of complaining about NBC's tape-delayed coverage of the Olympic Games., Sports and breaking-news events are the only two things left that people want to watch in real time, we are told. So we when we don't get to watch Michael Phelps race live, that's a problem. It is really easy to complain about coverage of a major sporting event, especially one as big as the Olympics. There is a lot of pressure to get it right, to satisfy the audience and of course, to pay the bills., After all these years of being America's Olympic network, NBC must be used to all the carping., I'm on vacation in London right now, but I have been reading all the complaints. And for the digital-savvy consumers used to watching things on their own terms who don't live in a world of time zones and tape delays they have reached a boiling point., In Britain, the venerable BBC is the host broadcaster. After getting a complete roasting about its less-than-perfect coverage of the Queen's Diamond Jubilee celebrations, the pressure has been on to get the London Games absolutely perfect., My goal is not to rub it in to all my friends back in the United States. But as a viewer, I can say that Auntie Beeb has been up to the challenge., As I write, it is early in the games, but my choices are vast. If you get your TV through a cable provider (not bunny ears), the choices seem mind-boggling. The flagship television channel, BBC One, is devoted to Olympic coverage, but there's so much more. Click a red dot in the corner of your screen, and you are directed to a vast menu of what's going on now and you are informed how much is live., For instance, at 11a.m. on Sunday morning, I was directed to 15 live events that were happening simultaneously; I could have watched any one of them. Watching later, I moved seamlessly from Bulgaria vs. Great Britain in the men's volleyball competition, with commentary, to North Korea vs. France in the women's table tennis, without commentary., I've also dipped into some field hockey and sculls. And then there's tennis: Monday, there were five separate live streams coming from Wimbledon. Not only was I spoiled for choice as to the sports I could watch, but also in the choice within sports., Those are your choices on the telly (as they call it here). There is a breadth of coverage online and on the radio. I watched the hockey on my iPad this morning. I can (of course!) listen on the radio. I've limited my social media diet, just so my Twitter feed will not be overloaded!, NBC's Live Extra app was supposed to provide more choice for more people. I can't access it from the U.K., so I can't evaluate it. Maybe the American complaints can only be satisfied when the Olympics happen in the United States, on a time zone that works for us., After all, prime-time advertising is how the bills get paid. In the meantime, I will just thank the BBC for making my Olympic viewing experience about as good as it can be.
Many experts say reducing mortgage principal can help troubled homeowners avoid foreclosure and stay in their homes. But the regulator who oversees two of the nation's largest mortgage holders, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, has rejected the idea., Many experts say reducing mortgage principal can help troubled homeowners avoid foreclosure and stay in their homes. But the regulator who oversees two of the nation's largest mortgage holders, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, has rejected the idea., A federal regulator is blocking the government-owned mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac from reducing the principal that homeowners owe on their mortgages in order to avoid foreclosures., Tuesday's decision came from Edward DeMarco, the acting director of the Federal Housing Finance Agency., NPR and ProPublica reported earlier this year that Fannie and Freddie had each determined that reducing principal for struggling borrowers would save money by preventing foreclosures. Despite that, DeMarco said he will not allow debt forgiveness because the risks outweigh the benefits., Mike Calhoun, head of the nonpartisan Center for Responsible Lending, said, What makes this especially disappointing is that other lenders are already doing this it makes good business sense. It saves money for the businesses. In this case it would save money for taxpayers., Calhoun said nearly half of all loan modifications done for non-Fannie and Freddie loans have a principal reduction component. So he says the private sector thinks it works., And Calhoun is concerned that the move by DeMarco could make it harder for private banks and other loan servicers to continue what he sees as these very effective types of loan modifications. Some of the language in mortgage-backed securities contracts directs the banks to use standard servicing practices and that can be interpreted as following the lead of Fannie and Freddie. But it's unclear how much of an impact DeMarco's decision will have on non-Fannie/Freddie loan modifications., DeMarco has said that one big concern he has about principal reduction loan modifications is that thousands of homeowners could default on purpose to try to get a handout., The Associated Press adds:, About 74,000 to 248,000 homeowners would be eligible for principal reductions from Fannie and Freddie, the [FHFA] analysis showed. An estimated 11 million Americans owe more on their mortgages than their homes are worth., The Obama administration immediately voiced its disappointment with the decision., 'I do not believe it is the best decision for the country,' Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner said in a letter to DeMarco., Geithner said allowing Fannie and Freddie to do 'targeted' reductions of principal for troubled borrowers would provide much-needed help to a significant number of troubled homeowners. He said that would help repair the nation's housing market and result in a net benefit to taxpayers., Bloomberg News notes that other programs have been implemented to help struggling homeowners., Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have completed 1.1 million loan modifications since the end of 2008, and have engaged in more than 1 million other transactions to avert foreclosures, including short sales or repayment plans.
Linda Cook eventually revealed herself as the commenter who made a disparaging remark about an Idaho Republican Party official online., Linda Cook eventually revealed herself as the commenter who made a disparaging remark about an Idaho Republican Party official online., The Internet is slowly becoming a less anonymous place. YouTube has a new policy encouraging commenters to use their real names, and many news sites have switched to a login system run by Facebook., News sites that still allow anonymous comments are finding there are legal risks. The Spokesman-Review newspaper in Spokane, Wash., has spent the last few months trying to protect the identity of a reader who saw a photo of a Republican Party official in Idaho named Tina Jacobson, and then posted a disparaging comment., The paper's city editor, Addy Hatch, practically has the comment memorized, given the amount of trouble it's caused., Is that the missing $10,000 from Kootenai County Central Committee funds stuffed inside Tina's blouse? Hatch recites., Besides insulting Jacobson's appearance, the comment suggested she stole party funds. Jacobson decided to sue the commenter for defamation and took the paper to court to make it reveal the person's name., The paper resisted on principle, Hatch says., You know, it's against the grain for a newspaper to give up anonymous sources of any kind, Hatch says. And we just felt like we had to take a stand., The Promise Of Comment Boards, Often Unmet, NPR has its own rules for participating in online discussions on npr.org. You can also read the NPR online community FAQ here. , But many journalists even those on the Spokesman-Review staff aren't so sure a newspaper should go to the mat to protect an anonymous commenter., Shawn Vestal, a columnist at the paper, wrote a column comparing anonymous commenters to monkeys throwing poop a column that earned him a few negative comments of his own. One phone call from a reader degenerated into a shouting match., But that's the whole point, Vestal says., I feel, very acutely, what might be waiting for me on the other end of that phone on the morning that a column runs, Vestal says. And I think that's good for me, to have to answer for what I might say., The debate over anonymous comments has been building in newsrooms for a decade. Old-school journalists argue the optimistic predictions of Internet comment boards brimming with the wisdom of the crowd haven't panned out. Instead, they say, news organizations tarnish their reputations by hosting comments that are often snarky and factually inaccurate., I don't begrudge anyone their right to say anything they want to say, Vestal says. But I don't know that it's our job to go to court to protect their right to say it anonymously., But Dave Oliveria, who runs Huckleberries Online, the Spokesman-Review blog where the offending comment appeared, feels differently., Does Free Speech Require Anonymity?, To have free speech in this community, I think you have to have anonymity, Oliveria argues., Huckleberries Online covers Coeur d'Alene and northern Idaho, small communities where there's a constant battle between the factions of the dominant Republican Party., In this town, there's so much infighting, if some of these folks identified themselves, they couldn't make these comments, Oliveria says. I have a lot of folks online here that are in a lot of key positions in the community., If his bosses at the Spokesman-Review required real names, he says, it would kill his blog and deprive the community of a crucial forum., But Oliveria also acknowledges he can only keep that discussion constructive by spending a lot of time monitoring it, and blocking the trolls., When you follow comments as closely as I do, I can tell by the sound who a person is, he says. They can keep changing their IP address, and I keep blocking 'em. And it frustrates them far more than it frustrates me, because I'm on there all the time., Oliveria knows that this kind of close monitoring is expensive for bigger news sites, and he's not even sure it will be sustainable in northern Idaho after he retires., A Commenter, Revealed, But as it turns out, going to court to protect his commenter won't be necessary at least for now. When the Spokesman-Review decided not to appeal a judge's order to identify the commenter, that commenter outed herself., She's Linda Cook, a long-time Republican activist., Compared to some comments I've seen even on Huckleberries mine was mild, Cook says of her post., Cook stands by her claim about the money, but not the way she originally phrased it online., The one thing I regret is that I made her appearance an issue, Cook says. That, I wouldn't have said. Everything else, you bet., Cook says she hopes online anonymity isn't going away. But she also acknowledges that you think twice about how you say something when your name is on it.
Pokerstars, an online gambling site, says that it has reached a deal with the U.S. Department of Justice in which it has agreed pay the government $547 million over three years, part of which will be used to reimburse customers of the site Full Tilt Poker., International customers of Full Tilt Poker will also regain access to their money about $184 million within 90 days after the deal comes to a close, Poker Star said on its blog. U.S. customers will be reimbursed through a program run by the government., Under the deal, Poker Star will acquire Full Tilt Poker, which at one time was one of the biggest gaming sites in the U.S., and begin operating the shuttered site in the United States once legislation allows for it., In a press release, Poker Star said it was not admitting any wrong doing., We are delighted we have been able to put this matter behind us, and also secured our ability to operate in the United States of America whenever the regulations allow, Mark Scheinberg, Chairman of the Board of PokerStars said in a statement. This outcome demonstrates our continuing global leadership of the online poker industry, and our commitment to working with governments and regulators to ensure the highest standards of protection for players., The poker news website, Diamond Flush Poker, said that the announcement lets those players who had deposited money at Full Tilt Poker breathe easier., NPR's Mike Pesca reported that in 2011, the FBI shut down FullTiltPoker.com, AbsolutePoker.com and PokerStars.com, charging them with fraud and illegal gambling. The shutdown also left players some who made a living playing online poker in limbo. Non of the players were charged, but they were still out of luck, with their money on hold for more than a year.
A construction worker carries lumber while working on new homes in San Mateo, Calif., in March. Homebuilding is at its highest level in nearly four years., A construction worker carries lumber while working on new homes in San Mateo, Calif., in March. Homebuilding is at its highest level in nearly four years., Housing, the sector that led us into the recession, now looks to be one of the brighter spots in the economy. Homebuilding is at its highest level in nearly four years. More homes are selling, and at higher prices., The question, of course, is whether this is a solid enough foundation to sustain a full housing recovery., Source: National Association of Realtors, Credit: Angela Wong / NPR, Lawrence Yun, the chief economist for the National Association of Realtors, says housing woes are largely behind us., It's been a harsh downturn, but the downturn is over, he says. Now we're beginning to turn the corner. [The] question is: How fast will we be turning that corner?, He points to increased home sales, rising rents and low interest rates among several reasons why he's certain the housing market is pointing in the right direction. And low inventories mean that price increases will surely be sustainable, he says., Yun says it may be counterintuitive, but in places like Las Vegas, Phoenix and southern California, the number of homes for sale is at a fraction of where it should be in a normal market, and the competition among buyers is fierce., And, he says, this housing recovery isn't just regional. Across the country, demand for homes is driven by investors as well as millions of families who put off buying a home in recent years until the market started to improve., It's a self-reinforcing process, where the increase in housing market activity begins to boost consumer confidence about homebuying, Yun says., Glenn Kelman, the CEO of online brokerage Redfin, says he shares in some of that confidence., We've been a bear, and now we're a bull, he says., To be more accurate, he says his company is a small bull a calf, maybe on the market. That is in spite of the fact that some people believe there's a vast backlog of foreclosed homes that are about to hit the market. Kelman's not buying it., Every conspiracy theorist in real estate believes that there's a huge chunk of inventory that the banks have just been holding back, waiting for our hopes to rise so that they can dash them again, and I just don't believe it, he says., &ldquo; Every conspiracy theorist in real estate believes that there's a huge chunk of inventory that the banks have just been holding back waiting for our hopes to rise so that they can dash them again, and I just don't believe it., - Glenn Kelman, chief executive officer of online brokerage Redfin, Kelman acknowledges there are still plenty of problems with the market. Namely, about half of Americans can't qualify for a mortgage., I don't think anyone believes we're out of the woods yet, but I do think that there's very little chance that the market is going to lose 10 percent, 20 percent and drag us back into the abyss, Kelman says., Gary Shilling, a financial analyst and well-known bear on housing, says the conventional wisdom that the housing market is stable is riddled with folly., You want to believe, yeah, yeah. Build it they will come, he says with a laugh., Shilling says he doesn't buy the idea that millions of people have steady enough income to afford buying homes., &ldquo; Probably in the next few quarters we're going to see that the foreclosures pick up and that start to be dumped on the market and it'll be a very different story., - Gary Shilling, a financial analyst, Household formation is very much determined by economic circumstances, he says. And right now they're very negative., In other words, just because somebody wants to move out doesn't mean that they can., They've got to have the ability, they've got to have the motivation, they've got to have the cash, the job, all these other factors, Shilling says., Shilling is among analysts who believe there is a big inventory of foreclosed and delinquent homes lurking in the shadows., In fact, last week RealtyTrac said that during the first half of this year, foreclosure activity was up in more than half of major markets. Shilling argues that when those properties hit the market, that will drive down home prices at least another 20 percent., Probably in the next few quarters, we're going to see that the foreclosures pick up and that start to be dumped on the market and it'll be a very different story, he says., He says there were similar blips of good data two years ago. Skepticism, he says, pays off.
Spotting a con artist isn't usually this easy. Allen Stanford was recently sentenced to 110 years in a $7-billion fraud, but a new book suggests the Ponzi business continues to thrive., Spotting a con artist isn't usually this easy. Allen Stanford was recently sentenced to 110 years in a $7-billion fraud, but a new book suggests the Ponzi business continues to thrive., Ponzi schemes get a lot of attention when big ones go bust. Bernie Madoff, of course, got a ton of attention when his $20-billion con collapsed in late 2008. So did Allen Stanford, who was recently sentenced to 110 years in prison for scamming investors out of more than $7 billion over two decades., But it turns out that the Ponzi industry is much broader and deeper than even the biggest blowups suggest. That's one lesson of a slim new book, The Ponzi Scheme Puzzle: A History and Analysis of Con Artists and Victims, from Boston University Law Professor Tamar Frankel., Losses from Ponzi schemes and other related frauds cost investors about $10 billion a year, according to Frankel, and victims range from ordinary people to executives at major financial institutions. One Ponzi scheme, in Romania, snared more than 2 million people., In the basic Ponzi scheme, the con artist pays returns to old investors with cash from new investors a system that collapses when investors stop pouring money in., The people running the cons use remarkably similar tricks to lure investors, according to Frankel. The tales that con artists tell investors are enticing in a consistent way, she says. The narratives hide the truth in a consistent manner., Here are four warning signs Frankel details in her book:, 1. High return! Low risk! It's a bedrock principle of investing that higher returns generally bring higher risk. If you're promised the opposite a big payoff with little downside be suspicious. A close corollary is Madoff's angle: Incredibly consistent returns whether the market goes up or down., 2. Where does the money come from? It's complicated. Con men often tell complex stories to explain their fantastic returns. Charles Ponzi's original scheme purportedly invested in international postal-reply coupons a kind of international stamp that could be cashed out in multiple currencies. Other scams have claimed to involve synthetic rubies, windmills, hydroponic farms, latex gloves, ambulance retrofitting, Canadian telephone-number leases, carpet contracts and bus shelters., 3. It's illegal, but it's safe. Ponzi schemers also tend to be quite up-front about not telling investors everything, Frankel writes. They may say they fear competitors, and offer to return the money of inquisitive investors (in effect threatening to kick them out of an exclusive and lucrative club if they keep prying)., In an extreme version, some con artists hawk safe illegality: arrangements that supposedly work by evading taxes or other laws, for example. One fraudster claimed to be offering an investment normally only open to employees of the financial company that employed him. The approach both explains the secrecy, and makes it harder to investigate or complain., 4. They don't even want your money. Ponzi schemers often feign reluctance to take an investor's money, which can defuse any suspicions. They also invoke safe-sounding words, like bank, securities exchange, voucher, guarantee, or full faith and credit, and call their investments trusts or trust units. Many foster friendships and even romantic relationships with their marks, and market their investments through the houses of worship they attend themselves., In the end, Frankel writes, con artists remind us of honest people. They are similar to entrepreneurs, eternally and unshakably optimistic, and they act like (and are) gifted salespeople.
The Fed doesn't literally print money, but it can create more if it wants to try to spur the economy., The Fed doesn't literally print money, but it can create more if it wants to try to spur the economy., August is supposedly a quiet month on Wall Street, in Washington, D.C., and for business and finance generally. Except sometimes it isn't and it's always the run-up to September, which can be pretty eventful in itself (think 2008 and the collapse of Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac and Lehman Bros.)., So this week is shaping up to bring August in like a lion, with several potentially significant economic developments already on the calendar., Two of the biggest: the potential for major Federal Reserve action on Wednesday, and some much-anticipated jobs numbers on Friday., First, the Fed. Its Federal Open Market Committee that's the panel that nudges interest rates up and down meets on Tuesday and Wednesday in the wake of a couple grim economic reports: The unemployment rate didn't budge in June and the country added just 80,000 jobs. Plus, economic-growth numbers released last week showed sluggish growth., In early June, Jacob Goldstein on this blog looked at the Fed's options at the time, and they remain pretty much the same. The big question is whether we'll see QE3 or a third round of quantitative easing. That amounts to the Fed printing money to buy financial assets from the banks, in the hopes of leaving them flush with cash and more eager to lend. (Any action is likely to come on Wednesday.), Some question whether even significant easing will have much effect on bank lending, and whether more debt is such a good idea. But much of the chatter ahead of Wednesday's meeting is not so much about whether the Fed will do this but about whether the Fed will do it now, or wait to see how much things improve (or worsen) before its September meeting., Friday, of course, brings another data-point for judging just how well the economy is doing: the July jobs numbers. As we mentioned, last month's report was widely seen as disappointing; it also contained fresh indications that the problem of long-term unemployment isn't improving., As our own Adam Davidson wrote in a recent New York Times Magazine column, the monthly jobs report is best used as a long-term gauge of economic health. This despite the fact that it has become an instant sensation that can move financial markets and even influence the very job picture it's supposed to reflect. (But if you missed it, check out the Times blog post riffing off Adam's column and describing how the job numbers come together it's worth a read.), There are some other events this week that have the potential to make headlines. In Europe, a Thursday meeting at the European Central Bank and Tuesday jobs numbers could herald action on Europe's debt crisis, or just more doomsaying. And in Washington, the head of the new Consumer Financial Protection Bureau delivers the agency's annual report to a sympathetic Senate committee, and a less friendly one in the House., And this isn't even the first full week of the supposedly quiet month. Which brings us to David Plotz's tongue-in-cheek (we think) argument in Slate in 2001 to cut the month to a mere 10 days. We could get behind that., Note: I edited the post to clarify that the Fed meets over two days, with any official moves likely coming on Wednesday.
Inside the High-Stakes Politics of the Federal Budget, by David Wessel, Hardcover, 204 pages | purchase, More on this book:, As the federal debt balloons, reducing it would seem more and more pressing. Yet policymakers remain far apart. Debt, deficit and budget rhetoric is often accompanied by numbers cherry-picked to support a particular political view., But a new book by Wall Street Journal economics writer David Wessel lays out the numbers that both political parties face., In the early 1980s, about 10 percent of the federal budget went to Medicare and Medicaid, Wessel tells NPR's Renee Montagne. Now, it's about a quarter of all spending, and it's on the way to 33 percent of all spending unless something happens to change the trend., The book is called Red Ink: Inside the High-Stakes Politics of the Federal Budget, and it breaks down the budget in stark terms: how the government spends its money, who pays what in taxes, and why politicians can't reduce a potentially catastrophic debt load., Wessel tells a story about one politician who didn't pay his taxes: Richard Nixon. Nixon wasn't required to disclose his tax returns as a candidate, but he was embarrassed when they were leaked to the media revealing that he had paid barely any taxes between 1970 and 1972. That turned out to be a huge scandal at the time, Wessel says, and in fact, it was that report that led Richard Nixon to utter his famous words, 'I am not a crook.' , Nixon ended up having to pay a lot of back taxes, but that's kind of lost to history, because the Watergate scandal obscured it, he adds., Tax returns are also an issue for current presidential candidate Mitt Romney, who has been reluctant to release his records. I think that in the Romney-Obama contest, the question is not only how much did Mitt Romney pay in taxes, but what should the government policy be toward taxing people at the top, Wessel says. He identifies three questions on which the candidates disagree: First, does the U.S. need more tax revenue in order to bring down the deficit? Second, if it gets more tax money, from whom should it come? And third, how much should we rely on the tax code to close the gap between winners and losers in our economy?, David Wessel has received the Pulitzer Prize and is the author of In Fed We Trust., David Wessel has received the Pulitzer Prize and is the author of In Fed We Trust., People who made over a million dollars last year got about 12 percent of all the income in the United States, and paid about 18 percent of all the federal taxes, Wessel says. If you take the famous top 1 percent ... they got 17 percent of the income and they paid 25 percent of the taxes. Politicians and voters disagree on whether that's fair, Wessel adds, but that's a question of political judgment, not numbers. But what about those who pay no taxes at all? Wessel says 46 percent of households paid no federal income tax at all last year many of them lower income households that are exempt, people who take advantage of tax breaks offered by the government, and retirees. A lot of them don't have much money, that's true, Wessel says, but I think it's also contributed to a kind of sense that they're only taking from the society and not giving to it. ... [It] creates a political problem, it makes them feel like they're outside the system, and it leads to a lot of resentment., Wessel says he hasn't heard any substantive talk about the budget from either party on the campaign trail. It's hard to get a consensus, a political consensus for doing what we have to do if people aren't getting straight talk, he says. It is simply not true that we can solve our deficit problem only by taxing the top tier of people, and it's very unlikely that we can cut spending enough to solve the deficit without raising taxes on pretty much the bulk of the American people., If he were moderating the campaign debates, Wessel says, he'd ask each candidate for five proposals to combat the deficit. How much would they do in tax increases? How much would they do in cutting defense spending and so forth, he says. A budget is a way to put into specifics what your belief system is. So it would be good if we could somehow force the candidates to say, yes, I differ from my opponent, here's my recipe, and then people would know what they would do if they were elected., Read an excerpt of Red Ink
A worker at a Colorado National Guard construction site funded by federal stimulus funds in 2010 in Lakewood, Colo. Economists say the latest gross domestic product report shows the recession was less severe than previously thought. That's because government spending helped prop up the economy. Now, eyes are turning to the Federal Reserve to boost growth., A worker at a Colorado National Guard construction site funded by federal stimulus funds in 2010 in Lakewood, Colo. Economists say the latest gross domestic product report shows the recession was less severe than previously thought. That's because government spending helped prop up the economy. Now, eyes are turning to the Federal Reserve to boost growth., The Commerce Department's latest report confirms that economic growth was as lousy this spring as you suspected it was., Now the question is: Can anyone do anything to make it better in the year's second half?, Next week, the Federal Reserve's policymakers may take another stab at it. Many economists believe that when the Fed officials gather on Tuesday and Wednesday, they will start rummaging around in their bag of monetary tricks, looking for new ways to boost growth., Lots of people would be cheering them on because they believe the recovery needs more stimulus. They want Congress to do more, too., Policymakers must act to provide more support to the economy if they want it to grow fast enough to start putting sustained downward pressure on today's still too-high unemployment rate, economist Josh Bivens wrote in his analysis for the Economic Policy Institute, a left-leaning think tank. The unemployment rate is 8.2 percent., The Fed policymakers most likely will go over their math and start developing a new policy plan. But then they might hang back and delay action for another six weeks, some analysts say., The outlook is worse than the Federal Reserve's June projections, and as a result we expect to see another round of policy moves to bolster growth, IHS Global Insight chief U.S. economist Nigel Gault said in his written analysis. But we expect the Fed to wait until September to act., What triggered the talk of new stimulus efforts was the Commerce Department's report Friday morning on second-quarter gross domestic product, the broadest measure of economic activity. Ideally, GDP would be growing at about 4 percent fast enough to create jobs for the 12.7 million unemployed people who would like paychecks., But just as most economists had predicted, growth advanced only 1.5 percent from April through June, down from the sluggish 2-percent pace set in the winter., While those quarterly results were widely expected, the Commerce report did contain a bit of a surprise: It revised historical numbers to show the recession wasn't quite as bad as originally thought, thanks to government stimulus spending., The government economists now say the GDP shrank 4.7 percent during the recession that stretched from late 2007 to the middle of 2009. That was less of a slide than the initial estimate of a 5.1 percent contraction., Friday's revision was triggered by data showing that government spending and investment rose far more in 2009 than economists had initially measured., Alan Krueger, chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, wrote for the White House blog that the revised numbers prove the stimulus spending supported by the Obama administration in early 2009 had a cushioning effect that helped the economy., Krueger said Congress should do more now to stimulate growth through White House-backed economic proposals. Republican lawmakers have very different proposals intended to spur private-sector growth. With the November election looming, Congress appears unlikely to reach agreements., That leaves the Fed as the only stimulus player in town. It can help growth by pumping more cash into the financial system and helping hold down interest rates. But the central bank already has used a variety of techniques over the last four years to boost growth by lowering interest rates to historical lows and providing lenders with very large amounts of cash. Some question whether the Fed already has used up its best methods., But the Fed policymakers have shown considerable creativity, turning to rarely used techniques to beat down interest rates. For example, last fall, the Fed helped squeeze down on home mortgage rates by launching Operation Twist, a seldom-used strategy wherein the Fed sells its own shorter-term bonds and uses those proceeds to buy longer-term bonds. That puts downward pressure on long-term interest rates, which helps homebuyers., The question now is: Having used one extraordinary measure after another for years, does the Fed still have the firepower to do more? Prices for both stocks and oil rose Friday as lots of investors came to the conclusion that one way or another, the Fed, as well as the European Central Bank, would find some way to once again stimulate growth., Here's a guide to help you understand the jargon economists will be using as they discuss this latest report on growth., Gross domestic product is the broadest measure of the economy. It adds up the market value of all final goods and services produced within the country. The Commerce Department measures GDP every three months. It provides an initial estimate, and then revises that number over coming months and years as more and better data become available. On Friday, the department said that in this year's second quarter, GDP rose at a 1.5 percent annual rate, sending the total up to $15.6 trillion. That's far slower than the 3.5 percent pace considered healthy., The Commerce Department does its best to measure GDP, but it's not easy because the U.S. economy involves $15.6 trillion and 314 million people. It takes time to accurately measure all of the economic activity of businesses and consumers, as well as local, state and federal governments. Initial estimates can be off, sometimes fairly significantly. For example, the latest GDP report finds the 2007-2009 recession wasn't as deep as originally thought because more recent calculations show state and local government spending was stronger than first estimated. So the revised measure now shows the Great Recession shrank the economy by 4.7 percent, not by the 5.1 percent previously reported., In the economic realm, stimulus refers to any public policy designed specifically to give the economy a lift. Stimulus can be provided by Congress via fiscal policy, which deals with taxes and spending, or by the Federal Reserve, which handles monetary policy. The latter involves setting interest rates and controlling the amount of money in the financial system. Ideally, the economy would be growing on its own momentum. But when growth stalls, Congress and the Fed typically try to stimulate an expansion through some combination of more government spending, lower taxes, increased cash flow and lower interest rates.
Protesters from the Human Rights Campaign chant against Chick-fil-A President Dan Cathy's anti-gay marriage stance in front of a Chick-fil-A food truck in Washington, D.C., on Thursday., Protesters from the Human Rights Campaign chant against Chick-fil-A President Dan Cathy's anti-gay marriage stance in front of a Chick-fil-A food truck in Washington, D.C., on Thursday., Atlanta-based Chick-fil-A has long stood by its Bible-based roots, keeping stores closed on Sundays and donating millions to Christian causes. But when its president, Dan Cathy, went public to defend his company's stance against gay marriage, he set off a considerable controversy that has everyone from politicians to puppets weighing in., First telling the Baptist Press his company supported the biblical definition of the family unit, Cathy then told the radio program The Ken Coleman Show, I pray God's mercy on our generation that has such a prideful, arrogant attitude to think that we would have the audacity to try to redefine what marriage is all about., The backlash spread swiftly. Boston's mayor pledged to block the chicken sandwich stores from opening in Beantown, a Chicago alderman said he'll try to stop a franchise from opening in his ward and the Jim Henson Co. cutoff its Chick-fil-A collaboration. Because it's a private company, it will be difficult to measure the bottom-line impact of all the attention., Social Media Spread, Americus Reed, a marketing professor at University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School who studies brand loyalty, says Cathy underestimated what might happen once his comments to a niche religious publication and a syndicated radio show spread to a wider audience. I think this is part of the wake-up call for companies to understand that social media makes these decisions very, very risky, Reed said, because it's much easier now for these messages to get out to consumers and consumers to virtually organize., Chick-fil-A President Dan Cathy, Chick-fil-A President Dan Cathy, What does a famous chicken sandwich have to do with a polarizing political issue? The connection has long been clear to gay rights groups, which have tried to call attention to the millions of dollars Chick-fil-A, through its charitable arm, has donated to opponents of same-sex marriage. But never before has the Atlanta-based chain been thrust into such a swirling controversy over its faith-based positions. A quick recap of how Chick-fil-A suddenly found itself at the center of one of America's hottest social debates:, July 16, 2012, Company President Dan Cathy gives an interview to the Biblical Recorder newspaper, which is re-posted in the Baptist Press, saying, Well, guilty as charged, when asked about the company's support of the traditional family. We are very much supportive of the family the biblical definition of the family unit. We are a family-owned business, a family-led business, and we are married to our first wives. We give God thanks for that., July 18, 2012, Controversy spreads nationally on social media networks like Twitter and Facebook. The Office star Ed Helms announced on Twitter he's boycotting the company over the stance. Helms' tweet: Chick-fil-A doesn't like gay people? So lame. Hate to think what they do to the gay chickens! Lost a loyal fan., July 19, 2012, On the Chick-fil-A Facebook page, the company posts a statement saying it's staying away from further discussion of the gay marriage debate. Going forward, our intent is to leave the policy debate over same-sex marriage to the government and political arena, the posting said. Company spokesmen sent the same statement to NPR when we requested an interview., July 20, 2012, The Jim Henson Co., which controls the popular Muppets characters, announces on its Facebook page that it's cutting off its collaboration with Chick-fil-A in response to Cathy's comments. Coincidentally, the Jim Henson Creature Puppets that were to be distributed in Chick-fil-A kids' meals through August were pulled due to product safety reasons a few days later., Boston Mayor Thomas Menino writes a letter to Chick-fil-A vowing to block the fast-food chain from opening a franchise in Beantown. There is no place for discrimination on Boston's Freedom Trail and no place for your company alongside it, the letter reads. Since the move by Menino, a Chicago alderman and the San Francisco mayor have followed suit, saying the company should stay out of their cities., July 23, 2012:, In response to the firestorm, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee calls on Christian customers to show support for the company and stick up for Cathy's values. The goal is simple, he announced, calling on Americans to help those who honor the godly values we espouse by simply showing up and eating at Chick-fil-A on Wednesday, Aug. 1. As of 11:30 a.m. Friday, Huckabee's Chick-fil-A Appreciation Day already had more than 279,000 RSVPs., Meanwhile, gay and lesbian groups have called for same-sex couples to kiss at Chick-fil-A stores on National Same Sex Kiss Day Aug. 3., &mdash; Elise Hu, Support For Gay Rights, But other companies see the risks of going public on controversial issues differently. This year, a handful of big brands have made headlines for taking the opposite side supporting same-sex rights and benefits., From time to time we are going to make a decision that we think is consistent with the heritage and the tradition of the company that perhaps may be inconsistent with one group's view of the world, Howard Schultz, Starbucks CEO, said at a shareholder meeting in March., He explained the coffee giant's pro-gay positions were about making its employees proud and aligning with its corporate values., Since we made that decision there has not been any dilution whatsoever in our business, and as you can see, shareholder value has increased significantly, Schultz said, citing revenue growth in the face of efforts like DumpStarbucks.com, led by pro-family organizations., The lure of dollars from a lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender market is another likely motivator for taking certain social stands. Marketing firm Witeck-Combs estimated the LGBT market's buying power at $800 billion last year., I think it's a sign of the times to try and speak to other groups that potentially one has not had a connection with, and that's just part and parcel with trying to grow your market, Reed said., But beyond the big bucks, corporate reputation specialist Sekou Bermiss says companies may be motivated to contribute to community good., More and more, you see firms that are trying to or feel obliged to certain issues in society, [to] do some greater good in society, Bermiss said., Boycotts And Bottom Lines, Starbucks, Target and General Mills all stepped into the same-sex marriage issue by supporting gay marriage legislation in their home states. Each face ongoing boycotts led by the American Family Association and the National Organization for Marriage for doing so. The National Organization for Marriage said it's uncertain whether its boycotts are having an impact on businesses., And after JC Penney hired Ellen DeGeneres as its spokesperson, the socially conservative group One Million Moms called for her firing., They wanted to get me fired and I'm proud and happy to say that JC Penney stuck by their decision to make me their spokesperson, DeGeneres said on her show. The retailer also started running Mother's Day and Father's Day ads featuring same-sex couples., But Reed says companies that make a social argument for business gain should be prepared to change course if an outcry leads to longer term losses., Most brands are keeping their heads down because these are very controversial sorts of strategies. And it probably makes sense good business sense to not weigh in on these issues, Reed said., That's a lesson Chick-fil-A seems to be learning quickly., It declined requests for an interview, but in a statement said, Going forward, our intent is to leave the policy debate to the political arena.
London-based Barclays Bank agreed to pay a $453 million fine over charges it manipulated the London Interbank Offered Rate LIBOR a key global interest rate., We've been talking a lot lately about what's been dubbed the LIBOR rate fixing scandal, where some of the biggest banks in the world have been accused of manipulating a key global interest rate., If those words manipulation of a key interest rate leave you wondering what the big deal is, and who would be harmed, meet Dan Sullivan. He says the manipulation of LIBOR cost him a million dollars, in just 24 hours., Dan Sullivan used to work on a trading floor at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, for Sullivan Crauth Trading, which is me, my brother, and one other guy, Sullivan laughs., Dan wasn't trading cotton or soy beans. He was in an arguably much bigger market you've probably never heard of: He was buying and selling derivatives based on that interest rate, LIBOR, that the big banks have been accused of manipulating., People buy these derivatives for lots of reasons, but for what happens next, all you need to know is that on Sunday, Sept. 14, 2008, Sullivan was holding some derivatives that amounted to a lottery ticket. It was a small bet that would pay off big if something crazy happened with LIBOR., And something crazy did happen., Sunday afternoon, I was at my brothers house watching the White Sox game, and it started coming through on our phones, Sullivan recalls. We got texts from people: Hey, Lehman's going under, Lehman's going under., Lehman Brothers the giant investment bank was about to go bankrupt. This was a cataclysmic event. Dan's eyes got wide. He started doing the math on a piece of paper, and realized he might make a million dollars the next morning when the new LIBOR number came out., It was a total no-brainer that interest rates were going to skyrocket, he thought. LIBOR is an average of what big banks say they have to pay to borrow money, and a major bank was collapsing., They're supposed to be reporting what other banks will lend them money at, and if I were a bank, I wouldn't lend money to another bank at all that Monday, Sullivan says., But Monday morning arrived. At 6 a.m., the new LIBOR number came out. And it was unchanged, as if nothing has happened. One of the biggest bank failures in history had just occured, and you would never have known by looking at LIBOR., For Sullivan, the lottery ticket that looked like a big winner was instead worthless., I was just dumbfounded that morning, Sullivan says. I was like a deer in headlights. I can't believe what happened. And then it was only with hindsight that it started to become clear that they had just lied about it., Now that emails have come out, with employees at Barclays bank talking quite openly about setting LIBOR for their own benefit, he says it's like salt in the wound., In hindsight, I wished I had walked out that day, and just never come back, Sullivan says. After that, it's a frustrating experience to feel like you're just getting stolen from all the time., Sullivan isn't trading anymore. But there are a lot of others like him out there. Many of them are suing, and they say they lost more than he did. There are huge pension funds and hedge funds and city governments that bought these derivatives. A war is brewing in the courts.
Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo/NPR, No surprise: The economy grew only sluggishly in April, May and June. The U.S. Commerce Department says gross domestic product the sum of all goods and services produced in the country grew by just 1.5 percent in the second quarter., Below, we look at a snapshot of those goods and services what Americans produced and did during the quarter. But today's release also tells us more: what activity has been helping the economy, and what's been hurting, as well as some new insight into economic activity in recent years., The gist for last quarter: Consumer consumption continued to grow, but more slowly than in recent quarters. Government spending shrank again, though a little less rapidly than has been the case of late. And growth in private investment construction, capital equipment and the like picked up pace a little., First, here's that snapshot, using numbers fresh off the Commerce Department's presses. (For more detail on what's in each major category, check out a summary from Jay Kaplan at the University of Colorado Boulder.), Source: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, Another way to look at GDP is to look at what changed since the last report. In other words, what's working in the economy, and what isn't?, By that measure, consumer spending grew 1.5 percent, the same as growth overall as the chart shows, consumers make up a huge part of the economy., That's slower quarter-to-quarter growth than we've seen since the same time last year. And spending on durable goods stuff that lasts and tends to have higher price-tags, like cars and washing machines actually fell, by 1 percent., Other areas showed some brighter numbers. Private investment companies buying new equipment, residential or commercial construction, and so on grew by 8.5 percent during the quarter. That's a little better than last quarter, but still not great. One of the bigger drivers: residential construction, which grew by 9.7 percent., Government spending remained a soft spot, with state and local spending falling by 2.1 percent no surprise given the serious budget problems those governments are having. Federal spending also declined, by 0.4 percent., It marked the 10th consecutive quarter of slower state and local spending, and the fourth quarter in a row for federal spending., The Commerce Department's release also included its customary annual revisions for past year, as it absorbs additional data that becomes available over time., Overall, growth from 2008 through 2011 was a little slower than previously thought: 0.3 percent a year beyond inflation, on average, down from an earlier measurement of 0.4 percent. That's still pretty sluggish.
The economy grew at a sluggish 1.5 percent annual rate in the second quarter, the Bureau of Economic Analysis reported this morning, down from a 2 percent pace in the first quarter., This is the bureau's first estimate of GDP growth in the spring months. It will revise the figure twice in coming months. It's now 8:33 a.m. ET. We'll have more about the report shortly., Update at 10 a.m. ET. The White House Points To String Of Positive Quarters:, Today's report shows that the economy posted its twelfth straight quarter of positive growth, says Alan Krueger, chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, in a blog post about the news. He adds that while the economy continues to move in the right direction, additional growth is needed to replace the jobs lost in the deep recession that began at the end of 2007., Update at 9:05 a.m. ET. Republican Reaction:, Quick to jump on the news, the Republican National Committee tweets that The Wall Street Journal's headline U.S. Growth Slows In 2nd Quarter shows #Obamanomics at work., Update at 8:50 a.m. ET. Early Analyses:, &mdash; U.S. economic growth pulled back further during the second quarter of the year as consumer spending slowed&mdash;a reading that suggests domestic fiscal worries may becoming a more significant drag. (The Wall Street Journal), &mdash; A softening job market prompted Americans to curb spending. (Bloomberg News), &mdash; Growth appears to be slowing as expected ... [but] defying fears of a more pronounced slowdown. (Reuters), &mdash; The United States economy grew by a tepid 1.5 percent annual rate in the second quarter, losing the momentum it had appeared to be gaining earlier this year. (The New York Times), Update at 8:45 a.m. ET. How GDP Growth Has Varied In Recent Quarters., GDP growth stalled in first-quarter 2011. Here's a look at the latest estimates for quarters starting with those three months (figures show growth as seasonally adjusted annual rates):, &mdash; First-quarter 2011: 0.1 percent., &mdash; Second-quarter 2011: 2.5 percent., &mdash; Third-quarter 2011: 1.3 percent., &mdash; Fourth-quarter 2011: 4.1 percent., &mdash; First-quarter 2012: 2 percent., &mdash; Second-quarter 2012: 1.5 percent., Update at 8:42 a.m. ET. Reasons For The Ups And Downs:, According to the bureau, there was growth in the second quarter because of increases in consumer spending, exports and business investment., But the reasons growth slowed included decelerations in consumer spending and business investment. So, while those key sectors did grow in the quarter, they didn't grow as strongly as they had in the first quarter., Update at 8:38 a.m. ET. First-Quarter Growth Estimate Increased Slightly:, The bureau's latest figure on first-quarter growth showing an increase at a 2 percent annual rate is a small change from its previous estimate of growth at a 1.9 percent pace for the first three months of the year., Our original post Did Economy Slow Further In Second Quarter? We Find Out Today:, Expect to hear this morning that the U.S. economy slowed further in the second quarter, Bloomberg News says., In advance of the 8:30 a.m. ET release from the Bureau of Economic Analysis of data on second-quarter gross domestic product growth, the news service says a median forecast of 81 economists shows they expect to hear there was growth at a 1.4 percent annual rate, down from a 1.9 percent pace in the first quarter., That would also mean growth had cooled to the slowest pace since second-quarter 2011, when it grew at a 1.3 percent annual rate., In the often hard-hearted world of Wall Street, a report showing slower growth is being viewed this morning as potentially good news. According to The Wall Street Journal, U.S. stock futures traded essentially unchanged Friday as investors awaited data expected to confirm a further economic slowdown in the second quarter that bulls hope will spur more monetary stimulus., We'll update this post with news from the report after it is released.
President George W. Bush signs tax cut legislation on June 7, 2001. The cuts from this and a subsequent bill are set to expire at the end of 2012., President George W. Bush signs tax cut legislation on June 7, 2001. The cuts from this and a subsequent bill are set to expire at the end of 2012., An occasional series, Fiscal Cliff Notes breaks down the looming fiscal cliff of expiring tax cuts and deep automatic spending cuts set to hit around the first of year., About 80 percent of Americans would see their taxes go up if all the tax cuts signed into law by President George W. Bush were to expire as scheduled at the end of this year. And nearly 100 percent of the highest income earners would have to pay more including both the Obamas and the Romneys., I should pay more taxes, and folks in my income bracket should pay more taxes, President Obama said at a January campaign event., In 2011, Obama and the first lady had about $500,000 in taxable income, after deductions., If the tax cuts expire, the Obamas will pay an estimated $15,000 to $20,000 more in federal taxes, says Bill Smith, managing director in the CBIZ MHM national tax office., Most of the Obamas' income was from wages or from book royalties, explains Smith, whose large accounting and tax firm works with high net-worth individuals., If the cuts expire, tax rates on income at just about every level would rise. Smith says the top marginal tax rate would go up from 35 percent to 39.6 percent., Fiscal Cliff Notes No. 1: The New Middle Class Norm, And so you can see just the rate differential, the rate increase at the upper end accounts for a fairly high tax increase for the Obamas, he says., But it's nothing compared to the tax increase the Romneys would face. Now you're talking about real money, says Smith., Not only do Mitt and Ann Romney have a lot more income than the Obamas about $20 million in 2011, according to their estimated tax returns but more than half of it comes in the form of dividends and capital gains, taxed at a lower rate., In January, Romney said: What's the effective rate I've been paying? It's probably closer to the 15 percent rate than anything. Because my last 10 years ... my income comes overwhelmingly from investments made in the past, rather than ordinary income., Smith says much of that advantage would go away if the Bush-era tax cuts expire., Qualified dividends go from a 15 percent rate all the way to 39.6 percent, he says., And long-term capital gains rates would rise by 5 percentage points., In all, based on their 2011 income, the Romneys would see an increase of more than $1 million in federal taxes in 2013, Smith says.
Pedestrians walk past a medical marijuana dispensary in the Echo Park area of Los Angeles Tuesday. The City Council voted that day to ban marijuana shops outright., Pedestrians walk past a medical marijuana dispensary in the Echo Park area of Los Angeles Tuesday. The City Council voted that day to ban marijuana shops outright., The Los Angeles City Council voted Tuesday to shut down all of the medical marijuana dispensaries in the city. That's no easy task. There are more than 800 of them more than the number of Starbucks coffee shops in Los Angeles. But after years of struggling to regulate pot shops, city officials have decided to prohibit them altogether., Jennifer Moran supports California's 1996 Compassionate Use Act, which allows people to use marijuana for medicinal purposes. However, the new mother says things have gotten out of hand in her East Hollywood neighborhood. She's flanked on both ends of her block by medical marijuana dispensaries., When I walk home from the grocery store, I have to walk past a marijuana clinic where people are standing outside smoking marijuana, she says. People stand in front of my house smoking marijuana, and I'm right across the street from a K-2 school., In some areas of Los Angeles, dozens of pot shops crowd single zip codes. They feature myriad varieties of marijuana stuffed into plastic baggies, rolled into joints and cooked into brownies. Some are mom-and-pop nonprofits. Others are multimillion-dollar businesses serving more than 1,000 people., These patients easily obtain recommendations from a handful of doctors willing to write them for ailments ranging from cancer to back pain to stress. In testimony before the City Council, Los Angeles Police Chief Charlie Beck says he has no problem with medical marijuana., At a Los Angeles City Council meeting Tuesday, Los Angeles Police Chief Charlie Beck says large, for-profit pot dispensaries cause a public danger., What we do have issue with is large, for-profit businesses that operate outside what we think is state law, he says, and not only cause a nuisance to the community but cause a public danger because of a very toxic mixture of high-value narcotics and a lot of cash., Since 2007, Los Angeles has attempted to regulate pot shops by limiting their number and placing restrictions on their operations. Pot shop owners have sued, arguing that state law allows them to create collectives that distribute marijuana., Courts have issued conflicting rulings, with one saying federal law prohibits any use of marijuana. Indeed, federal authorities periodically raid pot shops in California., Many on the City Council are conflicted over the issue. Councilman Paul Koretz says pot provides relief for his friends with AIDS., I'm not happy about the hundreds of illegal dispensaries that have been added, but I don't want to see us completely close access off to people that desperately need medical marijuana, he says., Outside City Hall, Michael Oliveri sits in a wheelchair, inhaling pot through a vaporizer. He suffers from muscular dystrophy., I don't like the illegal shops. I even have friends that own some of them, and I tell them, 'You know, you're the problem. You're the reason why I have so many problems in L.A.,' he says., The 28-year-old says banning medical marijuana dispensaries will make it too hard for him to obtain a medicine that relieves his pain and improves his appetite., I'm pretty much fighting just to stay alive. It's the only medicine that allows me to eat, and not weigh 84 pounds and be 6-foot-1, he says. It's not a very good combo. So I'm trying to put on that extra 100 pounds., Under the new ordinance, Oliveri can grow pot with one or two other people. Or he can travel to nearby cities that allow medical marijuana dispensaries. Those pot shops may be deluged with customers as L.A. moves to shut down its own., Medical marijuana activists in the city haven't given up yet. They say they may place a referendum before voters that would once again allow pot shops in L.A.
Kelly Thompson, a mentor at Siemens, gives apprentices an orientation of the factory. The program provides on-the-job training in manufacturing., Kelly Thompson, a mentor at Siemens, gives apprentices an orientation of the factory. The program provides on-the-job training in manufacturing., Rebeca Espinal admits with a shy smile that she's a straight-A math student. She's a high school graduate who dreamed of going to college., Instead, Espinal, 17, is working in a Charlotte, N.C., factory that makes gas turbines and generators. She is an apprentice with the German company Siemens., I was planning on getting a degree in international relations, but with financial aid and how difficult it is to pay for college and everything, she says. So when Siemens came along and gave me the offer, it was too good of an opportunity to just let it go., With college costs rising and student debt mounting, a group of college-prep kids in Charlotte are opting for an alternative route: European-style apprenticeships., Siemens hired her and five other apprentices last year. These days, Espinal works on the factory floor., Running a machine, learning about programs, how to set up a machine for a program, also learning how to use tools and learning how to read blueprints, she says., Espinal learns all this with the help of her personal mentor, Danny Hawkins. He likes to call her Dora the Explorer. You can see the resemblance., It's a great way for these young people to learn that there is a demand for skilled workers, Hawkins says. Siemens has a very large workforce that's fixing to retire, and there's nobody to replace them., When Espinal finishes her four-year training program, she'll graduate with an associate's degree, a journeyman's certificate in machining and a guaranteed job that includes a starting salary of around $44,000 a year., Pushing Past Stigmas, Espinal is part of Siemens' first apprenticeship class here., But these apprenticeships in Charlotte go back to 1995 when the Austrian manufacturer Blum couldn't find skilled workers., Rebeca Espinal (center) and other apprentices work on Siemens' factory floor in Charlotte, N.C., Rebeca Espinal (center) and other apprentices work on Siemens' factory floor in Charlotte, N.C., So Blum created Apprenticeship 2000, a co-op with seven other local firms. It was revolutionary for its time. But Andreas Thurner, who runs the program, says it suffered from an American stigma against blue-collar work., You have the one-way path in America this is college education. So it was, you can imagine, a lot of resistance from counselors, from teachers, from principals, Thurner says., Over time, the stigma faded as the program grew. This year, Apprenticeship 2000 received a record number of applications., The companies foot the bill for training that costs about $160,000 per student over the course of four years., I think it's a small price to pay because I know the time when we couldn't do what we do now, Thurner says. We couldn't grow the business. We could not get machines in that they wanted because we didn't have the people to run it., For Manufacturing Jobs, Workers Brush Up On Math WBEZ, The Secret To Germany's Low Youth Unemployment, What's Driving College Costs Higher?, Thurner says there's no alternative to this on-the-job training. Modern manufacturing is high-tech, so you're dealing with expensive equipment. Push the wrong button and you've got a $50,000 mistake., Embracing New Dreams, On days when the apprentices aren't on the job, they're at Central Piedmont Community College in downtown Charlotte. The companies partnered with the school to develop a curriculum that mixes mechanics and electronics., Today, the apprentices are learning about chain drives., Espinal, the straight-A math student, says she doesn't regret giving up that international relations major., I don't regret it because you have opportunities in this company to grow, she says. And so one of my goals ultimately in this company is to become an engineer, and possibly, you know, travel around the world, go to other Siemens factories, and maybe, you know, work with other engineers from other countries., There are more than 20 other apprentices in Espinal's class. And they're smart some tell stories of taking advanced placement courses or receiving the top grades in physics., But apprenticeships are still fighting an image battle. Only 0.3 percent of the American workforce are apprentices, according to a report from American University economist Robert Lerman., It's a very minor phenomenon, he says., Lerman, a fellow at the Urban Institute, says studies show students truly benefit from on-the-job training., I do not understand why there isn't a much bigger push toward shifting funding toward apprenticeship programs, he says., Lerman is hopeful, though. He says these days there's more willingness to discuss apprenticeships as a viable career alternative. It seems the crummy economy is encouraging parents and kids to rethink the value of an expensive college degree.
In putting together our dream economic platform, we did have to wade through a lot of disagreement among our panel of economists to get to the six points of major agreement., Dean Baker, one of the panelists, wrote us to argue that some of the disagreement should have been left in., He writes that our fake presidential candidate will have to do a bit more work to get my vote, even if I did help to design the platform., Dean Baker:, I do feel there were some important aspects of these issues that listeners may not fully appreciate that I would like to lay out., First, while I fully endorse the view expressed in the segment that a tax deduction for employer provided health care makes no sense abstractly, there is a historical basis for this deduction that makes it difficult to change. Workers, and especially unionized workers, have often explicitly given up higher wages for better health care benefits. If they were to lose employer provided health care benefits, there is no guarantee that their wages would rise by a corresponding amount. While all good economists believe that there is trade-off between wages and benefits, that does not mean that the trade-off is always one-to-one and immediate., I would be worried that if we were to eliminate the health care deduction in an environment like the current one, in which high unemployment has badly weakened workers' bargaining power, it would result in a net reduction in workers' compensation. In my view, that can't be a good thing at a time where we have already seen such a large upward redistribution of income., I also do not share the concern, expressed by some of the other economists on the panel, that overly generous health insurance plans lead people to consume too much health care. I think the waste that results from an improper incentive structure for patients is trivial compared to the waste that results from other distortions in the health care system such as patent monopolies on prescription drugs and medical equipment., In short, while I think it's a great idea to get employers out of the business of providing their workers with health care insurance, I think we have to be very careful how we go about doing this. In the real world, ending the deduction the wrong way could do more harm than good., The real world also interferes with the idea of getting rid of the corporate income tax. As Robert Frank and I both suggested in the segment, the idea should be to tax the wealthy people who are getting large incomes from the corporation (either as shareholders or top executives), not to tax the corporation itself., However as a practical matter, I don't see much likelihood of the sort of increase in individual income taxes on the wealthy that would come close to offsetting the impact of lost corporate income taxes. For example, if we could raise the marginal tax rate on those earning above $250,000 to 45 percent, and for those earning above $1,000,000 to 60 percent (with no special treatment for dividends or capital gains), then we might be in the ballpark of offsetting the elimination of the corporate income tax., Unfortunately, I don't see anyone about to include tax rates of this size in their presidential platform. In the absence of a large increase in individual taxes on high-income households, I would not want to see the corporate income tax eliminated, since again it would imply a large upward redistribution of income., I should also mention another important issue with tax-free corporations in the wake of the Citizens United ruling. My naxafve economists' view of corporations is that they are an entity created by the government for the purpose of promoting wealth creation. As a legal entity created by the government, it never occurred to me that corporations could have rights like individuals. (I am distinguishing a corporation as a legal entity with special privileges, like limited liability, from a collection of individuals who decide to join together for a specific purpose, which could be political.), However, the Supreme Court disagrees with my view of corporations, insisting that corporations have the same free speech rights as individuals. In this context, those who control corporations are allowed the special privilege of giving pre-tax dollars for political causes., This is a serious asymmetry. If those of us who don't control a corporation want to give $100 or $1,000 to a candidate, we must first pay tax on our income and then pay this money from our after-tax income. However, Citizens United means that those who control corporations can effectively give tax-deductible contributions to the political candidates or causes of their choice. The corporate income tax does not fix this problem, but eliminating the corporate income tax under these circumstances would shift even more income and power to those who control corporations., In shifting from income and payroll taxes to consumption taxes you had noted my objection to a consumption tax as too complicated. The issue here is that we would have to know people's initial wealth to determine their consumption over the course of a year. For most of us this would not be difficult, we might have a house, a couple of bank accounts, a 401(k) and a few other odds and ends., However, it would be very difficult for the government to have a good assessment of rich people's initial wealth. In addition to whatever financial assets they have, wealthy people also are likely to own expensive jewelry, rare paintings, and expensive furniture. Unless we know how much of this wealth they possess, they can consume by selling some of these assets and have their consumption altogether escape taxation., If someone had a good plan for auditing the personal assets of the wealthy then a progressive consumption tax would be feasible. However in the absence of en effective wealth audit, a consumption tax would likely be a big giveaway to the wealthy., Finally, I would have objected to eliminating the payroll tax since the Social Security and Medicare are effectively insurance programs run through the government. While they do not have to be based (especially Social Security) on what people pay into the program; that is how they were established. We could change the mechanism of funding to just say that everything comes from general revenue, but I would certainly not try to make that change lightly. People do feel that they paid for their benefits, which is in fact to a very large extent true., To make an analogy, the flood insurance that the federal government provides in many areas could also be financed through general revenue. This could certainly be more progressive than the current mechanism of financing, even if not necessarily more efficient. However, just as there is an argument that the people who benefit from flood insurance should pay for it, there is also an argument that the people who benefit from Social Security should be the ones who pay for it., In a different political environment this link between those who pay and those who benefit can perhaps be broken and still leave us with a strong program that enjoys solid political support. In the current political environment I would not assume that this is the case. For that reason, I would be very reluctant to give up the payroll tax as a means to finance Social Security and Medicare., Those are my complaints against the Planet Money candidate's platform for now. He/she will have to do a bit more work to get my vote, even if I did help to design the platform.
The number of people filing first-time claims for jobless benefits fell by 35,000 last week, to 353,000, the Employment and Training Administration just reported., That brings the level about back to where it was three weeks ago and down near a four-year low but also keeps claims in the range where they've been trending for about the last year., Whether the claims report is giving us a clear sense of how the labor market is doing, however, is uncertain. According to Bloomberg News:, Changes in the annual auto plant shutdowns that occur this time of year have made it difficult to adjust the data for seasonal variations, the Labor Department has said. ... 'I'm not sure we can see a clean number for another week or two yet,' Bob Baur, chief global economist at Principal Global Investors in Des Moines, Iowa, said before the report. 'I look at the labor market and see it's gradually healing, just healing very slowly. Businesses are reluctant to do anything.'
A prescription drug called Suboxone helps wean people off of heroin and pain pills, but addicts have a hard time getting prescriptions. So they're turning to the black market., Suboxone is used in the treatment of opiate dependence., An Albuquerque man who goes by the name Mystery Man has stepped in to fill the void. He says he illegally sells Suboxone every day., To get Suboxone, Mystery Man has to find a patient with a Suboxone prescription, and give that person the $50 co-pay to fill it. He gets that money by selling, among other things, crack and guns., He sells each pill for $5. He uses the profit to pay himself and his bodyguards, and to invest in his next deal. He says he notices a difference in his customers. People don't overdose no more. They're just mellow, he says. If you take it you won't be stealing, you won't be robbing, and you won't be prostituting., Special Agent Keith Brown oversees the Drug Enforcement Administration's operations in New Mexico. He disagrees with Mystery Man. Mystery Man [is] not a doctor. He doesn't know anything about how the medicine should be used, the dosing of it, any side effects. I think is dangerous for all involved., Unlike pain pills and heroin, Suboxone (generic name: buprenorphine) is very hard to overdose on. Addicts can take it to avoid withdrawal symptoms and manage their cravings for these drugs., People who are treated with Suboxone are able to go back to school, they're able to go back to work, they're able to start paying taxes and taking care of their children, says Dr. Miriam Komaromy, who directs a state-funded addiction treatment hospital in New Mexico. It's making them able to return to being a functioning member of society., New Mexico has the highest fatal drug overdose rate the U.S. For years, it's battled against one of the worst heroin epidemics in the country. And while heroin use has pretty much held steady, a recent report from the New Mexico Department of Health shows the sales of opioid pain relievers that are popular recreational drugs increased by 131% between 2001 and 2010., Some physicians do prescribe Suboxone to treat addicts. But many do not., A lot of physicians are very resistant to prescribing Suboxone because they fear it will attract opiate addicts to their practices which brings with it a whole can of worms in terms of managing those clients, says Seth Williams, a nurse practitioner who treats the homeless in Albuquerque., Scientists have long searched for a prescription to treat addiction. But companies were hesitant to develop one. Charles O'Keeffe is the former president and CEO of Reckitt Benckiser, the company that developed Suboxone. There's not much money to be made in it, says O'Keeffe. This is not a disease space that a lot of people want to treat., Source: Center for Disease Control, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, The U.S. government stepped in and partnered with Reckitt to bring the drug to market in 2000. Buprenorphine the main ingredient in Subxone became the only drug doctors could prescribe to treat heroin and pain pill addiction in their offices. Because it is an opiate, the regulations are strict. Doctors have to complete a special training, and there's a limit to the number of patients they can see about a quarter of them may treat no more than 100 per year; the rest are limited to 30. But the need for opiate treatment has drastically increased, beyond what Reckitt could have anticipated., Source: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Administration, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, The prescription drug overdose death rate in the U.S. is three times what it was in 1999, and yet the number of new doctors certified to treat these addictions with Suboxone has plateaued. Dr. Komaromy in New Mexico says she thinks her state could multiply the number of providers by five and still not be meeting the need., Source: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Administration, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, The Center for Substance Abuse Research at the University of Maryland, College Park recently warned of an emerging buprenorphine misuse. But a survey of physicians who are certified to prescribe Suboxone underscores Mystery Man's role. The majority believe patients who seek Suboxone on the street are doing so to self-medicate., Doctors who treat addiction are worried that Suboxone will gain a reputation as a street drug. But for now, the street is the only marketplace keeping up with demand.
Job applicants outside the Staffmark temp agency in Cypress, Calif., in 2005. Temp hiring is usually a harbinger of an improving job market, but some analysts say more employers may be considering temps as a more permanent staffing solution., Job applicants outside the Staffmark temp agency in Cypress, Calif., in 2005. Temp hiring is usually a harbinger of an improving job market, but some analysts say more employers may be considering temps as a more permanent staffing solution., While the job market remains sluggish, temporary work is one area that's done very well in the economic recovery. Companies are keeping their temps longer and are even using them to fill professional and high-ranking positions., The average daily number of temporary workers employed during the first quarter of 2012 was more than 2.5 million. That's up from a low of 2.1 million in early 2009, according to the American Staffing Association., Temporary work was once considered a leading indicator for the job market a harbinger of improved prospects for people seeking permanent positions. But in this recovery, staffing agencies say fewer employers are taking temps onboard as permanent workers., More Opportunities, At Higher Ranks, It is clear that companies are using temp and contract workers and unfortunately not making those permanent hires at this point, says Joanie Ruge, senior vice president and chief employment officer for the temp agency Randstad Holding., Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Angela Wong, Because there's still some uncertainty and [companies are] wondering if the economic conditions are sustainable, this offers them some good flexibility, Ruge says., Historically, temp positions have also been associated with clerical and manufacturing jobs. But that's also shifting in the current economy. One of the biggest growth areas in temping, Ruge says, is high-skilled work: engineering, information technology, pharmaceuticals, accounting and finance., And employers are even hiring temps for jobs in the higher ranks. Ruge says professional positions make up about half of Randstad's business., Ed Schultz has been acting comptroller or chief financial officer for various companies on a temporary basis for more than a decade by choice., Schultz says companies thinned out their chief officer ranks or their C-suites during the recession. Now that the economy is recovering, there's more demand for mergers and acquisition work, he says, but not quite enough to justify a full-time hire., A 'Sea Change', And, Schultz says, it may be that many businesses will never fully hire back their executive bench., My feeling is that it's a permanent change, Schultz says. It's a sea change that we're seeing more activity in that interim C-suite area., Normally, the pattern with temp work is that it is cyclical: It goes up when the economy is good, and down when it's bad., But during leaner times, companies experiment with their workforce and sometimes make permanent changes, according to Nik Theodore, director of the Center for Urban Economic Development and a professor at the University of Illinois, Chicago., There's something more happening here, Theodore says. I think temping is becoming a more important feature of employers' workforce strategies, and a bigger part of the careers of workers., Companies use temps because they can pay fewer benefits, take on fewer legal responsibilities and fire them easily, Theodore says., But those perks for the employer usually come at a cost to the worker., Those temp jobs are often disconnected from the career pathways and job ladders that exist within a company, making it harder for workers to move up, Theodore says., 'You're Disposable', Still, for people like TaShea Mosley, 23, working as a temp is one of the few ways to get her foot in the door in a down economy. She wasn't able to find a full-time job, so she started temping as an administrative assistant through Manpower earlier this year., The only thing that differentiates me from anyone is that my badge is different, Mosley says. They treat me as though I am a full-time employee, actually. I just don't have all the benefits of being one., Mosley says she loves her current posting and hopes to be hired on permanently. The company has a hiring freeze, but she's hoping her job performance will earn her the security of a permanent position., When you're a temp, it's more like you're disposable, the Atlanta resident says. One day you can have a job, and the next day you can't. So it's always kinda like a little bit of a Russian roulette; you never know if it's going to be your time to go or not.
Sandy Weill, former chairman of Citigroup, in 2006., Sandy Weill, former chairman of Citigroup, in 2006., Sandy I. Weill, the former Citigroup CEO who helped usher in the era of super banks, said during an interview with CNBC today that big banks should be split up., What we should probably do is go and split up investment banking from banking, have banks be deposit takers, have banks make commercial loans and real estate loans, have banks do something that's not going to risk the taxpayer dollars, that's not too big to fail, Weill told CNBC. If they want to hedge what they're doing with their investments, let them do it in a way that's going to be mark-to-market so they're never going to be hit., They should be broken up, said Weill, so that the taxpayer will never be at risk, the depositors won't be at risk, the leverage of the banks will be something reasonable..., Bloomberg explains why this is a big deal:, Weill helped engineer the 1998 merger of Travelers Group Inc. and Citicorp, a deal that required repeal of the Depression-era Glass-Steagall law that forced deposit-taking companies backed by government insurance to be separate from investment banks. The New York-based company became the biggest lender in the world before almost failing and taking a $45 billion taxpayer bailout in 2008., In a separate interview with CNBC, Sheila Bair, former chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., said she was flabbergasted by Weill's reversal., He and his institution were in the lead in pushing for the repeal of Glass-Steagall and then, of course, Citigroup is the poster child for too-big-to-fail in the bailouts during the 2008 crisis, Bair said. It is truly ironic., After the Weill interview, CNBC also talked to Bethany McLean, who writes for Reuters. She called Weill's comments astonishing., Here's video of that interview:
Tax the other guy's subsidy all you want, but hands off my incentive that's good policy you're messing with., Tax the other guy's subsidy all you want, but hands off my incentive that's good policy you're messing with., We've taken a look at government spending in a few different ways lately, including the posts 50 Years Of Government Spending, In 1 Graph in May, and, more recently, Dissecting Federal Spending With An Eye On Cuts., Now the folks over at Pew Charitable Trusts a warren of data, analysis and insight are giving a glimpse of the spending through another prism: subsidies., Pew's Subsidyscope project says it aims to raise public awareness about the role of federal subsidies in the economy. On Tuesday, it released data looking at the subsidies received by nine sectors of the economy: agriculture, education, energy, health, housing, national defense, natural resources and environment, science and technology (including space), and transportation., The total? Some $823 billion in grants, $460 billion in tax breaks, and $113 billion in no-competition contracts for one year, according to Tuesday's report., The latest numbers show, for example, that in fiscal 2009 the federal government spent $504 per household on direct expenditures for housing housing assistance grants, government housing contracts, etc., But the government spent $1,581 per household, or $185 billion in 2009, on 13 distinct tax expenditures aka tax breaks including the mortgage-interest deduction ($79.4 billion) and a capital-gains break for those selling their homes ($23.5 billion)., Subsidy is a powerful word, of course. Technically, it just means the government is picking up part of the cost for something (and by extension, not for other things)., But aside from economists and journalists, it's often used with a bit of a sneer. After all, one person's incentive is another person's subsidy., The mortgage interest deduction one of the biggest and most popular on the federal books is an incentive for homeownership and encourages people to put down roots in their communities., Or maybe it's a subsidy for people who buy their homes, as well as the banking and housing industry a subsidy that renters don't get., Same with health care, at $4,728 per household in direct expenditures (think Medicare and Medicaid) and $1,598 in tax expenditures most of which came from not taxing the premiums employers pay for workplace health insurance., If you listen to our show regularly and this is all beginning to sound familiar, it should: One of the big reasons our No-Brainer Economic Platform panel came out swinging against tax breaks (including the mortgage-interest deduction and tax breaks for health insurance) is that they quickly become entrenched, and gum up the tax code with all kinds of conflicting and costly incentives and subsidies.
Then-presidential candidate Barack Obama poses with National Urban League President Marc Morial on Aug. 2, 2008., Then-presidential candidate Barack Obama poses with National Urban League President Marc Morial on Aug. 2, 2008., President Obama's speech to the National Urban League conference in New Orleans on Wednesday night coincides with a debate over the role of government in helping small businesses succeed., Some black Americans say they have an especially hard time when it comes to owning and operating their own businesses., On the northern edge of New Orleans' French Quarter, Shaka Zulu and his wife, Na'imah, are trying desperately to protect a slice of local culture that sometimes gets lost here., Following a Mardi Gras Indian tradition, each year African-Americans chant, parade through the city, and wear outfits elaborately decorated with beads and feathers. Zulu says it's all to pay homage to Native Americans who helped blacks during the time of slavery., Last year, he and his wife opened a restaurant and gallery called Golden Feather, where several Mardi Gras suits are on display., It's almost like an experience, you know, not so much a restaurant but you want to come in here and have an experience on a culture that's so unique to New Orleans., It seems a perfect fit for this touristy city. But for the Zulus it's been a struggle every step of the way. Na'imah Zulu says they had to launch the business using their own savings and the help of a couple of nonprofits because they couldn't get any bank loans., Of course, you know, business loans have a lot to do with whether you have homes and your assets and things like that, she says. Well, a lot of us don't have [an] extreme amount of assets due to our history., Three C's: Contracts, Contacts, Capital, Indeed, that's a problem for lots of African-Americans, whom studies show haven't accumulated nearly the same amount of wealth as whites. It's a little of a chicken-and-egg thing, says National Urban League President Marc Morial, a former New Orleans mayor., Morial notes that the number of black-owned businesses has grown dramatically over the past decade, but the overwhelming majority have no employees and have revenues below $50,000 a year., Black-owned businesses still face the challenges of the three C's, says Morial. Contracts, which mean opportunities to do business. Contacts, which lead to business opportunities. And capital., Morial's group has started working more closely with lenders and major banks to help make some of those relationships happen. Morial says the Obama administration has done a lot to help, especially through the Small Business Administration, but he's pushing the White House to be even more aggressive., We still have record high unemployment. We have record high unemployment in the African-American community, and there's a lot more work to be done, Morial says., Vaughn Randolph Fauria, president and CEO of NewCorp Inc., a nonprofit that assists such companies in New Orleans, agrees. But she's also worried about pressure to cut government programs that help minority-owned businesses., Things are getting better, says Fauria. But if we take out right now what is the safety net, then it could crumble. And so all of this work would then be something of the past, as opposed to something that built our future., Help For Minority Contractors, Fauria says black-owned businesses not only get a lot of help from the SBA and other agencies, they also benefit greatly from requirements that minorities get at least a share of government contracts., One of her clients, though, Louis Livers, says it's not always a sure thing that the money will trickle down to local businesses. He's had a general contracting company in New Orleans since 1990, and notes that billions of dollars were spent reconstructing the city after 2005's Hurricane Katrina., If half of the money had stayed here, this place would not look the way it does, that you drive around certain sections of New Orleans and it still looks like Katrina was days ago, says Livers., Instead, he says, most of the money went to large out-of-state contractors., Now, he and others have formed the Alliance of Minority Contractors so their companies can get a bigger piece of the pie, and hopefully hire local workers., Shaka Zulu says that's the hardest thing for him at his restaurant. People come in looking for work, and he needs help to grow his business. But he doesn't have the money to hire them.
A historically low inventory of cattle and hogs is driving up meat prices, a trend that's expected to continue next year, USDA economist Richard Volpe says., A historically low inventory of cattle and hogs is driving up meat prices, a trend that's expected to continue next year, USDA economist Richard Volpe says., A fierce drought has been scorching crops this summer, but it's still too soon to know exactly how much of a hole it will burn in your wallet., The U.S. Department of Agriculture has just released its latest forecast for retail food prices. Although beef and poultry prices are expected to rise as much as 4.5 percent this year, the USDA left its earlier forecast for overall food inflation about where it was at 2.5 percent to 3.5 percent for this year., That could change if the drought continues, USDA economist Richard Volpe said Wednesday., When it comes to rain, it's a moving target; it's changing every day, he said. Until we get that first heavy rain, we're not going to know for sure just where prices will end up in 2012. But it's clear the general direction is up especially for meat. And 2013 will see even more food price inflation as the drought impact works its way through the pricing pipeline, he said., The USDA report concluded that the severe drought in the Midwest is expected to affect prices for corn and soybeans as well as other field crops which should, in turn, impact retail food prices., The Outlook For Next Year, But the lag between when a crop is in a field and when a food product gets to the store shelf is considerable. That long process likely will shift much of the drought-related price inflation into next year. The transmission of commodity price changes into retail prices typically takes several months to occur, and most of the impact of the drought is expected to be realized in 2013, the USDA report said., Annual changes in food price indexes, Source: USDA, Credit: Alyson Hurt / NPR, A good example of that lag can be found at your meat counter today. The high prices you see there reflect the impact of last summer's vicious drought in Texas. With the ground burnt dry last year, the cost of keeping cattle fed in Texas shot up. The conditions sent beef prices soaring, up 10.2 percent for 2011., The impact is carrying over into 2012. The USDA says beef and veal prices will rise as much 4.5 percent this year and 5 percent next year. That's because last summer's conditions forced Texas ranchers to slaughter an unusually large number of livestock last fall. A historically low inventory of cattle and hogs is driving up meat prices, Volpe said., That dynamic will continue into next year. We expect a continued sell-off of cattle because this year's drought is going to continue to push up feed prices. To avoid those feed costs, any cattle considered 'market-ready' is going to be slaughtered, he said., As corn and soybeans wither in the parched soil of the Midwestern Corn Belt, crop prices are rising in commodity markets. The price of a bushel of corn, for example, shot to a record of more than $8 a bushel recently, up more than 50 percent in about a month. Some experts say it could push to $9., Each July, USDA economists look out across crop conditions to construct forecasts for food prices over the next 12 to 18 months. Last year, food prices rose for Americans by about 3.7 percent, a sharp increase from 2010 when prices rose less than 1 percent., Heading into this year, most forecasters had been expecting the rate of food inflation to slow, rising only perhaps 2.5 percent for 2012. Volpe said that figure is still possible, but the more likely outcome now will be a somewhat higher figure more like 3 percent or so., Feeling The Pinch At The Register, Food experts say Americans, whose wages have been growing only slightly, will surely feel a hard pinch at the grocery cash register, but a much bigger problem looms overseas, where basic food prices could spike far higher., That's the scenario that played out in 2008 when crop prices began rising sharply, along with more expensive oil. While Americans experienced unwelcome increases in retail prices, people in many poor countries got hit with huge spikes that led to riots that year., In 2009 and 2010, the global recession cooled food and fuel price pressures, but then in 2011, inflation began rising sharply again, especially for rice, cereals, cooking oil and sugar. Those hikes triggered political unrest in Tunisia, Yemen, Egypt and other countries., Higher global food prices generally reflect the law of supply and demand. Because of tough weather conditions in the United States and elsewhere, global grain stocks are very low this year., The Global Impact, At the same time, demand for food keeps rising. As people get wealthier in fast-developing countries like China and India, they can afford to eat more and better foods. Other factors are at play. too, including food-trade policies and financial speculation in commodities markets., A recent report by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations named another problem: Higher oil prices are a fundamental factor behind the higher agricultural commodity price projections, affecting not only oil-related costs of production but also increasing the demand for biofuels and the agricultural feedstocks used in their production., Economists hate to see any inflationary jolts coming at a time when the global economy is in a fragile condition. In the United States, for example, food price hikes would leave consumers with less to spend on clothes, cars or other goods., Still, the drought's impact in this country has been relatively muted because the price Americans pay at the store is determined by many factors beyond the cost of raw foods. When a shopper picks up, say, a box of corn flakes, the corn itself accounts for just a few pennies of the sticker price. Most of the retail price reflects nonfood factors, such as the colorful packaging and marketing, as well as the store's air conditioning and decor., It's different in less prosperous regions of the world. Many shoppers in poor countries pick up a simple sack of cereal at an open market. There's no elaborate packaging for the food or light fixtures for the store. The price paid by the customer tracks closely with the cost of the crops. So a spike in commodity prices can translate much more directly into a jump in the retail price.
Taxes may be certain, but growth and job creation aren't., As the U.S. edges closer to a year-end fiscal cliff, Democrats and Republicans haven't budged in their fight over expiring tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans and how best to help the middle class and get the country back to work., Wednesday's Senate votes on rival tax proposals are largely symbolic. The Democrats' tax plan would extend Bush-era cuts for a year to everyone except individuals earning more than $200,000 and families that make more than $250,000; the Republicans' plan would extend the cuts for all., At the heart of the impasse is a decades-long debate over a central notion in an economic theory once championed by President Ronald Reagan: that wealthy individuals invest their savings from tax cuts in ways that create jobs further down the income ladder., This trickle down idea has become an article of faith for many Republicans and so-called supply-side economists, though many analysts are skeptical. But one thing economists do agree on is that uncertainty over whether the tax cuts will be extended and for whom is the biggest threat to the economy., Correlation And Causation, For Neil Buchanan, who teaches tax policy at George Washington University of Law, the proof isn't there that tax cuts boost hiring. A chart comparing tax rates and job creation would show no obvious correlation, he says., Look at the big-growth era of the '90s, when tax rates went up, and virtually no growth in the 2000s, when tax rates were down, Buchanan says., Among other prominent (and vocal) supply-side doubters are Nobel laureates Paul Krugman and Joseph Stiglitz., But Brian Domitrovic, author of Econoclasts: The Rebels Who Sparked the Supply-Side Revolution and Restored American Prosperity, is just as convinced that Reagan-era tax policy has paid economic dividends even during that period in the '90s., During the 1990s, you really had erratic growth. GDP was up and down and then finally locked into a 4 percent to 5 percent growth range from about 1996 onward, Domitrovic says., In the latter half of the decade, when it was clear that the only option for taxes was to go down what with the Republican Congress and the surpluses there was fast growth, he says., Some economists say it's hard to see a correlation in the numbers when you compare tax rates and levels of job creation over the past 30 years., Source: U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Internal Revenue Service, Credit: Nelson Hsu/NPR, Save It Or Spend It?, Supply-siders cite what's known as entrepreneurial incentive to make their tax case. It assumes wealthy individuals will invest their tax savings in innovative, job-creating activities either using the extra cash to fund startups or simply expanding businesses they may already own., While economists don't question that such an incentive exists, they do lock horns over its impact., Joseph Minarik, senior vice president and director of research at the centrist Committee for Economic Development, points to research showing that the richer you are, the more likely you are to save any tax-cut largesse. In an uncertain economy, such as the current downturn, that trend is exacerbated., Savings is virtuous, says Minarik, who was associate director for economic policy at the White House Office of Management and Budget during the Clinton administration. But the name of the game in the long run is to consume more, and right now, that's what we need to stimulate the economy. We need more demand., Gary Clyde Hufbauer, a fellow at the nonpartisan Peterson Institute of International Economics, agrees. If these folks are buying Treasury bonds or corporate stocks, you're not going to get much of a kick in the economy, he says., Hufbauer says that in the early 1980s, when the top marginal tax rate dropped from 70 percent to 50 percent, the entrepreneurial incentive made a difference, but with top marginal rates now closer to 30 percent, the effect is considerably diminished., (If the cuts are allowed to expire, the top marginal tax bracket would increase to 39.6 percent from 35 percent for families and to 36 percent from 33 percent for individuals.), On the other hand, Hufbauer doesn't believe the government is going to get as much revenue as Democrats hope if the tax cuts are allowed to expire for the wealthiest individuals., If you raise the tax rates on these people, they will spend more time with their accountants trying to figure out how to get their tax rates down, he says. So, you don't get as much money out of them as you think you're going to., It's The Uncertainty, Stupid, But economists on both sides of the supply-side debate are less concerned with which party wins the latest tax cut fight than they are over the prospect that Congress will do nothing as is almost certain, at least until the November election. That, they agree, is the worst-case scenario., The most important thing is to have marginal tax rates stable, says Luigi Zingales, who describes himself as a reasonable supply-sider. He says the uncertainty increases doubt about the economy., Like other supply-siders, Zingales, who teaches at the University of Chicago's Booth School of Business, is also concerned about the debt., For him, raising enough revenue to bring down the deficit and debt trumps the entire tax issue. As a result, he's come to a conclusion that might sound like blasphemy to fellow supply-siders:, I don't see a path to fiscal stability that does not include higher marginal tax rates, he says.
M1 Abrams tanks sit on the assembly line at a plant in Lima, Ohio, the only place where the tanks are manufactured. Plant and local officials fear the plant won't survive if the military temporarily halts new tank orders., M1 Abrams tanks sit on the assembly line at a plant in Lima, Ohio, the only place where the tanks are manufactured. Plant and local officials fear the plant won't survive if the military temporarily halts new tank orders., M1 Abrams battle tanks are the rock stars of military armor. They're made in only one place: Lima, Ohio. The Army says it's done ordering them, but Congress appears intent on spending millions for more, arguing that cutting production is bad for the economy and national security., The Joint Systems Manufacturing Center in Lima is a government-owned site run by General Dynamics. Product Manager Cliff Barber weaves past robotic arms, laser cutters, and cranes to reach a row of rusty orange hulks, some of the first Abrams tanks to be produced. They're waiting to be restored and upgraded, at a cost of $6 million each., These particular shells that you see here were old M1A1s built in the late '80s, Barber says. They're now going to become ... the latest U.S. configuration of tanks., There are 800 workers at the plant, down from 1,250 three years ago. Back then the plant rolled out two Abrams tanks a day. Now it's one every two days. The Army says ceasing production will save billions as it develops a new line of tank to be unveiled in 2017. Plant Manager Keith Deters says idling production for three years doesn't make sense., The rusted hull of an old M1A1 tank waits to be restored at the General Dynamics Land Systems plant in Lima, Ohio., The rusted hull of an old M1A1 tank waits to be restored at the General Dynamics Land Systems plant in Lima, Ohio., The cost to shut it down, which there is significant cost there, [and] the cost to bring it up far outweigh the cost just to keep a steady state of minimum amount of tanks to flow through here, Deters says., Some Lima officials are troubled., We don't believe that it's possible ... to keep in place the human resources, organizational resources [and] supply chain resources that can ultimately make restarting the plant possible, says Lima Mayor David Berger. A temporary shutdown is actually a permanent shutdown., After the Army didn't order new tanks last year, Congress approved $255 million to upgrade dozens of M1s through 2014. Ohio Republican Sen. Rob Portman, who sits on the Senate Armed Services Committee, pushed hard for the spending., You know last year I was able to play a role to ensure that the facility would stay open for this year, Portman says, but we're now fighting the same fight for next year., Ohio Democratic Sen. Sherrod Brown also backs the spending, even if the Army says it doesn't need the tanks. We can make cuts to the Defense Department and we need to, but it's not just jobs for Ohio. It also contributes to our national defense in a long-term, industrial base, kind of way, Brown says., Brookings Defense analyst Michael O'Hanlon says the talk on defense policy from President Obama, Republican presidential hopeful Mitt Romney, and the congressional leadership is careful campaign strategy., What they are respectively trying to do is maneuver an angle for that marginal Ohio voter who may actually think this issue is important, to influence their vote this fall, O'Hanlon says., If the president vetoes the tank funding, plant backers hope foreign tank sales can sustain production through 2017, though there's no customer quite as dependable as Uncle Sam.
An industrial shredder at International Shipbreaking Ltd. in Brownsville, Texas. The landlocked city has become the hub of the U.S. ship-recycling industry., An industrial shredder at International Shipbreaking Ltd. in Brownsville, Texas. The landlocked city has become the hub of the U.S. ship-recycling industry., This fall, the U.S. Navy will contract three Cold War-era aircraft carriers the USS Forrestal, the USS Saratoga and the USS Constellation for scrapping. Often called supercarriers owing to their massive size, the ships contain nearly 60,000 tons of steel and other metal each., All three carriers are likely to be sent to the landlocked city of Brownsville, Texas, to be ripped apart., The deepwater Port of Brownsville lies inland at the end of a 17-mile channel connecting to the Gulf of Mexico. The long channel provides unparalleled protection from hurricanes and tropical storms., In the past two decades, the city has become the center of the U.S. ship-recycling industry. Five of the nation's eight recycling companies are here. It's like Home Depot locating right next to Lowe's and Ace Hardware., Tearing up big ships can be a lucrative business. It's also a messy one. Walk inside a ship that's being scrapped, and you'll find one of the nastiest places imaginable: filthy and rusty, with everything that's poisonous and salvageable torn out., If it has rained, everything's all wet, too. Brush up against a bulkhead and you can kiss a white shirt goodbye., But if you're a ship cutter, this is your office, and your cutting torch, your music to work by. Sixty cutters are employed here at Bay Bridge Texas, but even more will be hired soon., A tanker ship waits to be recycled. Even ships that appear to be in good working condition are valuable as scrap metal., A tanker ship waits to be recycled. Even ships that appear to be in good working condition are valuable as scrap metal., Bay Bridge Texas is the nation's newest ship-recycling yard, says senior Vice President Barry Chambers. The company, backed by Indian investors with deep pockets, just moved to Brownsville from Chesapeake, Va., Chambers says the infrastructure, the deep water channel and the weather all make the Texas city particularly attractive for his company. But building the yard, he says, still required plenty of work., This land did not look like this, Chambers says. I put in 175,000 cubic yards of fill, leveled and compacted it., Now, the yard's piers are built to handle ships as large as aircraft carriers. The pilings, made of steel cores, sink 60 feet deep., From a distance, the tanker ship at the dock looks as though giant Post-It notes have been slapped onto the hull. But those squares are actually holes; the ship's been turned into Swiss cheese for ventilation and light., Sergio Cazeres, who's been cutting ships since 1992, says the first cuts are made in the side of the ship. In the hulls, we make cuts so the air can flow in, he says. If it's too hot then we provide fans., Recycled ships are typically scrapped from the top down and from front to back. As the steel is harvested, the bow lightens, and powerful winches begin to pull the ship out of the water and up a ramp., Large white air bags, supporting 250 tons of weight, are rolled underneath., Chambers says he moved from Virginia to Texas not just for the warm weather and infrastructural perks, but also for the labor pool. He pays between $10 and $13 an hour for the recycling work., The Hispanic workforce that I found here is excellent, Chambers says. It's attitude more than anything. Every day here is different. This is not an assembly line job, and everyday you have to use your wits., A ship cutter helps dismantle a ship at the Bay Bridge Texas recycling yard., A ship cutter helps dismantle a ship at the Bay Bridge Texas recycling yard., In a nation hungry for working-class jobs, ship recycling is helping to drive Brownsville's economy even at these relatively low wages. Nearly 1,000 welders scrap 80 percent of the ships recycled in the U.S., After a ship is dismantled, the metal is shipped to Mexico. Chambers used to send much of his steel to the city of Monterrey in railroad cars 20 boxcars per train, loaded with 60 tons of steel in each., But that steel had a market value of 10 to 15 cents per pound. And eventually, the boxcars began showing up in Mexico empty., Chambers has no idea how the bandits were doing it. It's unbelievable, he says., It was no small feat to rip out the steel, Chambers says. We've even tried welding the steel in there. Then we tried welding bars across the top of it, but it still disappeared., So now, the steel goes by barge, and the shipments arrive intact. A few months later, they come back into the U.S. as automobile frames, engines and parts to be assembled here., It's the large availability of ships to be recycled that drives the industry. And as the nation's reserve fleet of aging warships and tankers has become too old to use, those ships are increasingly being sold for scrap., The price for steel has decreased in recent months with the slowing of the world economy. But that doesn't mean you can't make money breaking ships. Kris Wood, vice president of ESCO Marine, says ships still yield plenty of other valuable elements., There's a percentage makeup of nonferrous metals: That's your coppers, your brass, monels that are higher value, Wood says. So, if the scrap market is down but the ship is still very rich in nonferrous metals, the project can still be a lucrative one., Back on board at Chambers' yard, the ship cutters remove everything of value the furniture, the plumbing, the fixtures, the lighting and sell it. A shopper can get some good deals if they're open to a nautical theme.
Apple reported its financial results for the quarter ended June 30, and depending how you look at it, they're either amazing or disappointing., The company says it made $8.8 billion in profits over the course of three months. That's more than enough to buy every share of Alcoa, the global aluminum giant, which was worth just under $8.6 billion when the stock market closed this afternoon., Put another way, the computer company's profits were just about the same as Mongolia's entire economic output for all of last year, using World Bank GDP figures, and bigger than the output of the nations of Belize, Liberia, Bhutan, Guyana, Greenland and Guinea-Bissau combined., In three months., But the stock market is not happy about this: Since the company announced the news after the market closed this afternoon, Apple's shares have fallen by nearly $30, or just shy of 5%, in after-hours trading., The problem, of course, is that investors wanted Apple to hoped Apple would, even expected Apple to make a good bit more., They were looking for profits of $10.4 billion (a little bigger than Armenia's gross domestic product) and revenues of $37.2 billion, according to John Paczowski over at All Things Digital. Apple's revenue was a mere $35 billion (the economies of Latvia and Tajikistan, with enough left over to cover the Marshall Islands and Tuvalu)., Those revenue and profit numbers, incidentally, also make it easy to see how much of each dollar spent on Apple products goes to profit: about 25 percent., That kind of profit margin is so good that it's hard to come up with a good yardstick for measuring it. When Fortune tallied the most profitable companies last year, only 19 companies on its Fortune 500 list matched or beat Apple's number for last quarter. (At the time, Apple's profit as a percent of revenue was just 23.9 percent)., Apple shares still trade for a little over $600 apiece, up from just over $398 a year ago. Disappointed Apple investors can presumably sell a couple shares, buy a new MacBook and maybe feel a little better about their investment.
Apple reported lower-than-expected third-quarter revenues, numbers partly blamed on slower iPhone sales., Apple reported lower-than-expected third-quarter revenues, numbers partly blamed on slower iPhone sales., A spike in iPad demand wasn't enough to offset slower iPhone sales in the third quarter as Apple Inc. reported lower-than-expected revenues, sending its after-hours stock price on a 5 percent dive., The company announced third-quarter revenue of $35 billion, or $9.32 per share; earlier, Bloomberg had projected $37.22 billion, or 10.37 per share., It's only the second time since 2003 that Apple's profit and sales failed to meet projections, Bloomberg reported., Apple said its quarterly net profit rose to $8.8 billion, or $9.32 per share, compared with a net profit of $7.3 billion, or $7.79 per diluted share, in the same quarter a year ago. Its revenue in that quarter was $28.6 billion., The numbers were blamed on sluggish sales of the iPhone, Apple's No. 1 revenue source. The company sold 26 million iPhones; that was 28 percent higher than during the same quarter last year, but analysts surveyed by Bloomberg had expected sales of 28.4 million units., Customers, anticipating a new model of the iPhone this fall, appeared to be holding off buying the existing model., Every quarter that Apple isn't launching a new iPhone it's a transition quarter, Brian Marshall, an analyst at ISI Group, told Bloomberg. That's the key product that matters., Sales of the iPad tablet, meanwhile, spiked 84 percent compared with a year earlier. Apple sold 17 million iPads, compared with the 15.4 million expected., Bloomberg also reported:, Looking ahead to the current quarter, Apple forecast revenue of about $34 billion and profit of $7.65 a share. That compares with predictions by analysts for sales of $38 billion and profit of $10.27 a share., After what was a bruising day for most of the market because of concerns about the European economy, Apple's stock price dropped by more than 5 percent, to $570 a share, after hours., Still, on a year-on-year basis, profits were up around 20 percent, as Matthew Yglesias wrote on Slate., He adds:, The interesting thing is that one month ago, Apple had a price:earnings ratio of 14 which is exactly what you would expect from a company deemed to be in good shape but not poised for any breakthrough earnings growth. Yet 20 percent was disappointing. Market psychology is a curious beast.
Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney., For today's show, we've collected three Planet Money radio stories never before heard on the show. All of them deal with people who handle other people's money a politician's, a workforce's, and even a continent's:, Just How Blind Are Blind Trusts, Anyway?: With questions swirling about Mitt Romney's investments, a look at how blind trusts really work., The European Central Bank's Guide To Influence: With much of the continent on shaky financial grounds, the ECB is all about influencing governments, not making friends., Public Pensions Are About To Look Less Healthy: Accounting rules are changing, and that could mean a nasty surprise for a lot of public employees. (And for more on just what's behind the change, see Monday's blog post, Why Public Pensions Are About To Look Less Healthy.), Download the Planet Money iPhone App. Music: Two Door Cinema Show's Sleep Alone. Find us: Twitter/ Facebook/ Spotify/ Tumblr.
The 2011 Frankfurt Motor Show in Germany featured Ford Motor Co.'s new three-cylinder EcoBoost engine, which will hit the U.S. market next year., The 2011 Frankfurt Motor Show in Germany featured Ford Motor Co.'s new three-cylinder EcoBoost engine, which will hit the U.S. market next year., Ford Motor Co. intends to prove that good things come in small packages really small packages. The company has taken engine downsizing to a new level with its new three-cylinder EcoBoost engine, which has been introduced in Europe and is set to hit the U.S. market next year., The EcoBoost offers more power than many conventional four-cylinder engines, with fuel economy numbers a hybrid could envy. Early fans are calling it a modern little engine that could, and Ford is betting that American customers are ready to embrace a three-cylinder engine., An Unsuccessful Predecessor, Seventeen years ago, Americans could buy a car that got a whopping 45 miles to the gallon on the highway. No, it was not the Toyota Prius, the hybrid car that arrived on the market five years later. The car was actually General Motors' Geo Metro, which also had a three-cylinder engine., The Geo Metro was not a success, with about three times the horsepower of a riding lawnmower. But the car did have one bragging point: astonishing fuel economy., T.J. Baldermann, a certified car technician, has bought at least seven Geo Metros, which do not include the ones he's bought just for parts. He says it's hard to beat 45 to 50 miles to the gallon. Baldermann is part of Geo Metro's tiny, loving fan base. But the car never sold well and was discontinued in 2000., Paying Less At The Pump, More At The Dealership, Ford spokesman Richard Truett is optimistic about consumer demand for the three-cylinder EcoBoost. I think everyone realizes that fuel prices are going to be permanently high, he says., Technology exists for gas cars to get 55 mpg, but they won't have all the comforts consumers want., Fuel-economy standards will double by 2025. Electric cars may reach the goal if people buy them., The engine may be small, weighing less than 225 pounds, but that's a point of pride for the company. Greg Johnson, a powertrain engineering manager at Ford, says this engine is more powerful than the four-cylinder engine in the current Ford Fiesta. It uses direct fuel injection and turbocharging., Ford cars powered by the new engine could get well over 45 miles per gallon with no hybrid technology involved. But those savings at the gas pump will cost drivers at the car dealership. Ford is expected to charge about $1,000 more than for one with a four-cylinder engine., The big experiment is, will Americans pay more money for a smaller motor if they're getting better fuel economy out of it? says car industry analyst Aaron Bragman of IHS Automotive., He says the strategy is working with Ford's F-150 pickup truck. The standard engine is a V-8, but almost half the truck's buyers are paying extra for the V-6 engine with fewer cylinders, direct injection and turbocharging., Betting On Hybridlike Fuel Economy, Ford is likely to market cars as offering hybridlike fuel economy without the hybrid price. But Bragman figures not everyone with a Prius is going to trade it in., There's a certain magic to the word 'hybrid' for some people. There are some people that just want to have the hybrid. They want to have a hybrid badge. They want to be seen as having purchased a hybrid, Bragman says., Still, Bragman thinks most drivers care less about what's under the hood than they do about fuel economy., While Ford is betting on its little engine, GM is staying out of that game for now even though it has a modern three-cylinder engine that it sells in cars in Europe. Instead, GM thinks American drivers will embrace something else once shunned here: diesel. The company will offer a Chevy Cruze that runs on diesel fuel next year.
President Obama and Republican challenger Mitt Romney have been trading attacks over the issue of American jobs being moved overseas., The president has pounded Romney for the investments made by his former firm Bain Capital in the 1990s. Not to be outdone, the Romney campaign has suggested most of the money from the president's stimulus program went to create jobs overseas., Independent fact checkers have concluded the Romney charges are inaccurate and that Obama's claims about Romney are misleading. Harvard economist Mihir Desai says the emphasis the candidates are placing on the offshoring of jobs is out of proportion to its effect on the economy., We're going through something very dramatic economically and it is tempting to pin that on the most visible articulation of economic change, which is globalization, Desai says., He says it's true that since the nation's financial crisis hit, multinational companies have been creating more jobs overseas than in the U.S. But, he says, that doesn't mean those offshore jobs were created at the expense of American workers., This crude logic, which is when firms grow abroad that means we're worse off at home, is probably not right, Desai says. In fact, he says, when firms add employment abroad, often to serve foreign customers, they're more likely to add jobs at home., And that's not the natural way for people to think about the world, but once you start to say to yourself, 'Well, so now they are growing abroad,' Desai says, ... that allows them, for example, to do more [research and development] in the United States; that allows them, for example, to have more headquarter activities in the United States because they're successful abroad., But that doesn't mean there haven't been hundreds of thousands of U.S. workers hurt when their jobs moved overseas. Desai says the focus of this debate should be on what sort of compensation and training those displaced workers can receive., I think that's an important thing to talk about, Desai says. We just have to learn how to talk about that without throwing the proverbial baby out with the bath water and saying our firms who go abroad are somehow being traitorous., Desai says a pox on both the candidates for distorting this issue. Princeton economist Alan Blinder has a slightly different view of the importance of offshore jobs in the presidential debate., I think it's modestly relevant in our current economy and likely to become increasingly relevant, Blinder says., Before the financial crisis hit, Blinder thought offshore jobs would be the biggest economic issue of the next 20 years. That's because he estimates that over that period, a quarter of all the jobs in the U.S. will be vulnerable to move offshore because of advances in communications technology., That doesn't mean they'll all move overseas, but Blinder says the victims won't be just call center and manufacturing workers. A big swath of jobs higher on the skills ladder will be threatened., These are people that if you raised this question 15-20 years ago, 'Are you vulnerable to competition from foreign labor?' It would have been a far-fetched thought, Blinder says., But the answer is not to try to stop American companies from growing overseas, he says., I think to the extent it's a public policy issue, it's mostly whether the tax code should be encouraging this, Blinder says. There I think it's a lot easier to give an answer [of] 'No.' That's a long way from banning it., Obama has said he wants to close tax loopholes that create incentives for companies to move jobs overseas. But there's another complicated debate over how best to do that.
A visitor looks at artist Nathan Sawaya's Lego sculpture T-Rax at The Art of the Brick exhibition in Taiwan earlier this month., A visitor looks at artist Nathan Sawaya's Lego sculpture T-Rax at The Art of the Brick exhibition in Taiwan earlier this month., Lego Group, maker of those iconic plastic building blocks, inspires an almost fanatical following in some quarters. But as a business, it turns out, it came close to going bust by following the hot advice of the day and then recovered by turning to a more prosaic playbook., The story is told by David Robertson, a professor of operations and information management at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School of Business. He's written a book on the topic, and the condensed story is part of the business school's Knowledge@Wharton feature, detailing its faculty's research. (Robertson, his bio tells us, was previously LEGO Professor of Innovation and Technology Management at Switzerland's Institute for Management Development.), Update: It turns out NPR's own Jessica Smith did a piece a couple years ago looking at Lego's remarkable turnaround. Check out the story and transcript., Robertson's account traces the history of Lego's Danish founder, and his company's transition from wooden toys to plastic, in particular the iconic plastic blocks, after World War II. The company rode the toy-buying wave of the baby boom., As Robertson tells it, Lego ran into a sales slump in the 1990s, thanks to the rising popularity of computer games and other more sophisticated toys. So the company did what so many experts in the early 2000s were advocating: It went on an innovation binge., For example,, the firm found relatively competition-free markets where Lego could dominate; management sought the participation of a number of different constituencies from both inside and outside the firm and hired a diverse and creative staff; it tried to create new products that disrupted existing markets; and it listened to customer feedback., But results were limited, and the company began running low on cash. Ironically, the case study says Lego found its solution in recommendations from a different expert a management consultant who soon became Lego's chief executive., Most of the solution will be familiar to anyone watching the economic world over the last 20 years: The company sold off parts of itself to private equity investors (including most of its stake in the Legoland theme parks), and outsourced the overwhelming majority of its plastic-brick production to cheaper facilities in Mexico and the Czech Republic., Voila, cheaper labor and refocusing on the company's core products made up for what innovation hadn't. The company also opened retail stores and straight-to-DVD movies. Sales and profits have risen nicely., In the end, the story seems to be one of taking more conventional expert advice over the trendy approach of the moment. Either way, it offers some insight into how companies can wind up following the most conventional business models, despite their best efforts.
Corn plants dry in a drought-stricken farm field on July 17 near Fritchton, Ind. The corn and soybean belt in the middle of the nation is experiencing one of the worst droughts in more than five decades., Corn plants dry in a drought-stricken farm field on July 17 near Fritchton, Ind. The corn and soybean belt in the middle of the nation is experiencing one of the worst droughts in more than five decades., Stop by most any unirrigated farm across the lower Midwest and you'll see crops in distress. Midwestern corn and soybean farmers are taking a beating during the recent drought, but it's not likely to drive many out of business., Most of those farmers carry terrific insurance, and the worse the drought becomes, the more individual farmers will be paid for their lost crops. The federal government picks up most of the cost of the crop insurance program, and this year that bill is going to be a whopper., Rain Over Texas Quenches Dry Lone Star State, Despite a withered soybean crop that he says won't even let him break even, Loren Alderson, a farmer in Nickerson, Kan., isn't too worried., The government has a program of crop insurance, revenue insurance, and it certainly is a lifesaver for years like this, Alderson says., That's an attitude typical of most farmers affected by this drought, says Bruce Babcock, who specializes in agriculture economy at Iowa State University. They're not too worried because the great majority of them have crop insurance, he says. In the Corn Belt, upwards of 85 percent of farmers carry crop insurance, if you can call it that., It's not really insurance, because, as we know, when we buy insurance, we have to pay the full premium, Babcock says, and that premium covers not only the losses, or the claims that are made, but also the administration and profit for the company., When a farmer buys crop insurance, the government picks up most of the premium, and it also pays operating expenses for the companies. Those two subsidies cost close to $8 billion a year. But taxpayers also insure crop insurance companies against catastrophic loss., So, as claims from this year's drought mount, the USDA will shoulder a larger and larger share of the payout. Babcock says it'll likely be taxpayers, not insurance companies, paying the bulk of this year's crop insurance claims, which could easily run more than $10 billion., The drought really shows how important the program is, and who's really funding it, Babcock says., Payouts are going to be extra high because most Corn Belt farmers also carry coverage tied to the changing value of the crops they produce. The drought has cut projected supply and pushed prices way up., The more bushels of corn that are lost, the more each one of those lost bushels tends to be worth for a farmer's insurance settlement, and the more taxpayers owe drought-stricken farmers., Crop farmers are going to be OK coming out of this drought, Babcock says. Taxpayers are not going to be; they're going to be paying large losses., Of course, taxpayers do expect to eat, even after an agricultural disaster, so, arguably, in that light, crop insurance makes sense, says Tom Zacharias, the president of National Crop Insurance Services., It's designed to help the consumer, Zacharias says, so that we know that we have stable, secure food supply. [And] we want to keep farmers in business from year to year., Zacharias says crop insurance is a pretty efficient way of doing it, because while farmers pay into the system year after year, they don't get any money out until something goes wrong. In normal years, crop insurance companies eat the losses, and he says those insurance companies are eager to please., These folks are 24/7, he says. We have loss-adjuster staffs in the field as we speak., So, disaster coverage payments typically arrive in time to cover getting the next crop in the ground and keeping the food system running. But, farmer Loren Alderson says, that's about as far as it goes., Technically, you don't lose money, Alderson says, but if you're especially a younger farmer who's got land payments to make and machinery payments to make, they're not going to be able to make those costs with insurance., While it will take months to figure the true costs of this rapidly intensifying drought, it is clear there is going to be plenty of pain to go around.
On Friday, Planet Money's Caitlin Kenney told Morning Edition listeners how public pension plans are going to look a lot less healthy very soon. A new study shows just how bad they might look, even as it offers some caveats to its own results., Public pension systems, of course, are hurting in many states and cities. Some haven't been funded sufficiently to provide promised retirement benefits to teachers, firefighters or other public-sector workers. Poor investment returns have taken their toll across the board. Benefits are being curbed in some places because the costs of these pensions compete with other priorities like schools, parks, transportation and public safety., The new problems come from the green eyeshade crowd the Government Accounting Standards Board. Under new rules from the board, state and local governments will have to change how they present the financial health of their pension plans to the public. Although the changes are dramatic at first glance, there are some important caveats., The overall picture is scary. Under the old rules, plans reported having, on average, 76 percent of the assets they would need to pay promised benefits to every retiree and employee from now until the last one dies., The new rules would slash that figure dramatically to an estimated 57 percent, according to a report from Boston College's Center for Retirement Research, which used 2010 data (the most recent broadly available). As the chart below shows, the impact of the change varies enormously. But bottom line: very few retirement systems would look healthier., Source: Boston College Center For Retirement Research, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, Pension administrators have taken issue with the Center's estimates. Matt Smith, the actuary from Washington State, says he disagrees with the report's projections for his state's pension funds. Smith says the study ignores recent benefit reductions, made some assumptions on only a few years' data, and doesn't use 2011 investment returns. He and his staff are currently preparing figures that he says will better reflect the impact of the accounting changes., Now, these rules don't change by a penny how much money the plans have, or how much they must pay in benefits. They still have the same pools of investments to pay the same IOUs to retirees, on the same schedule., What will be different is the picture that's presented of how plans are doing., Today, public pension plans are allowed to smooth out the ups and downs of their investment returns. Losses from the financial crisis of 2008 aren't reflected in many plans, but neither are most gains from 2010, an up year in the stock market. The idea is that pension plans must look far into the future so short-term ups and downs are less important. At the same time this smoothing can mask serious problems for years., The new rules would stop the smoothing. Instead, pension funds would have to show gains and losses each year. That could mean big swings in a plan's heath from year to year, especially for plans heavily invested in stocks, hedge funds or other unpredictable investments. In many ways, it's a more precise presentation. And for employees with pensions at stake, it may be a stomach churning one., There are other changes. Many plans will have to be more conservative in setting the number they use to figure out what their pension IOUs are worth in today's terms the discount rate (a concept covered in detail by our show Friday). That change, too, will make plans look more fragile., The new rules are controversial, for both technical and public-policy reasons. The accounting standard-setters explicitly warn that the new rules aren't meant to be used to decide how much governments should contribute to their plans. But pension advocates worry that's just what will happen., Plan administrators say the new rules also don't adequately take into account the fact that pension plans have decades to make good on their promises, meaning year-to-year fluctuations shouldn't play such a big role in the accounting., Either way, the new numbers are likely to make an unpleasant splash for governments and their employees alike.
Stocks fell sharply on Wall Street this morning as traders reacted to word that Europe's debt crisis may be deepening and that China's economy may slow, Bloomberg News says., The Dow Jones industrial average was down more than 200 points, or a little less than 2 percent, after an hour of trading. Other indices were also off., The Wall Street Journal says fears intensified that Spain could need a bailout and aid for Greece might dry up., What's more, says Reuters: There were also worrying signs from U.S. earnings. McDonald's Corp fell 2.3 percent to $89.45 after posting lower-than-expected profit. Its chief executive officer said the results 'reflected the slowing global economy (and) persistent economic headwinds.' , We'll keep an eye on the market and update as the day continues., Update at 3:15 p.m. ET. Still Down, But Not As Much:, With about 45 minutes to go in the trading day on Wall Street, the Dow Jones industrial average is now down about 1 percent for the day, or about 135 points. Other indices are also off by about the same percentage., Update at 12:20 a.m. ET: It's midday and the Dow Jones industrial average is now down about 1.3 percent 165 points.
For weeks, Democrats have been trying to call voters' attention to the financial dealings of Mitt Romney, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee., Supporters of President Obama, the Democratic Party's candidate, have been suggesting that Romney has exploited tax shelters and offshore accounts to build and protect his wealth in ways that average taxpayers would never be able to do., They are demanding Romney release many years of tax returns., Romney has released only his 2010 return and a draft estimate of his 2011 return. He has said he'll release the full 2011 return when it is ready but no more than that. He says his investments are held in a blind trust, so he is not responsible for decisions about how the money is handled., This controversy is the latest example of America's mixed feelings about wealthy presidential candidates, including John F. Kennedy, Ross Perot and John Kerry., But the Romney situation has raised important questions, such as: What the heck is a blind trust? Are offshore accounts floating on boats near the horizon? Seriously. What are we talking about here?, Let's take them one at a time., This is a legal arrangement in which a person hires someone else, called a trustee, to manage his or her financial assets, such as cash, stocks and bonds. The person who owns the assets gets no information about specific actions taken by the trustee and has no right to intervene in the handling of the assets once they are inside the trust. The goal is to allow wealthy people to hang on to their assets while avoiding conflicts of interest. Because the owners are blind to where their money is, they can't make decisions specifically intended to boost the value of their investments., A shelter is any investment or financial arrangement that tends to lower or even eliminate the amount of money owed in taxes. A simple shelter commonly used by average Americans is an individual retirement account, or IRA. An individual can open an IRA to shelter savings. The money you invest is allowed to grow over time without being taxed until you are at least 59 1/2 years old and can start withdrawing it. But wealthy people often pursue extremely complicated investments to shelter large amounts of money. Romney's IRA holds as much as $101 million., This is a bank account located in a place that is outside the authority of your own country. The word offshore is a figurative term, not literally referring to a watery location. Lots of offshore banking is done in landlocked places like Switzerland and Luxembourg. Americans open such accounts because they typically provide far more privacy, less regulation and lower taxation. One might be used by, say, a wealthy person going through a divorce who wants to hide assets to keep them out of U.S. divorce proceedings. These days, the offshore accounts can be fairly easy to use because money can be readily accessed with debit or credit cards and wire transfers.
As Mitt Romney has faced questions about his investments and tax returns, the likely Republican presidential nominee has responded with two words of explanation: blind trust., Romney keeps most of his wealth in a blind trust designed to prevent him from knowing exactly where his money is and what it's doing. It's a long tradition for presidents and candidates, though anyone can set one up if he wants to., But it turns out that not all blind trusts are equally blind. Some are cast into complete and utter darkness. Others are more nearsighted., Ken Gross, an ethics lawyer with the law firm Skadden Arps in Washington, D.C., has helped presidential candidates set up blind trusts. He says blind trusts are complicated, expensive and generally a pain., Most people who have any kind of wealth are interested in how it's managed, Gross says. And blind trusts, because they are blind, you don't know what's going on with your money., But a blind trust does have one crucial advantage for a politician: It becomes an easy answer to any conflict-of-interest question. Mitt Romney used it in the Republican primary debates earlier this year., My investments are not made by me, he said at the time. My investments for the last 10 years have been in a blind trust, managed by a trustee., Of course, there's an easy response from a less wealthy opponent. In fact, there's a video going around of Mitt Romney from 1994, when he was challenging another very rich candidate with a blind trust: Ted Kennedy., The blind trust is an age-old ruse, if you will, Romney said. Which is to say, you can always tell a blind trust what it can and cannot do., So which one is it? Blind or not blind? Well, all trusts are not created equal., Federal election rules require fairly tight ones. State rules, not so much., I called up a trust lawyer, Colby Wallace, with Bernstein Shur in Portland, Maine. I asked him how you can tell how blind a trust really is., His advice: First look at the person who runs the trust, the person who's supposed to keep all the investments secret. If the person is a friend or relative, it looks bad., Second, look at what went into the trust at the very beginning. Rich people get rich in specific fields or by starting specific companies, Gross says. And just because it becomes part of a blind trust doesn't erase it from your memory., The third way to evaluate a trust is to look at what kind of reporting the trust makes back to the politician. If the candidate gets fairly detailed reports about how much he has made in capital gains, dividends or interest, he may be able to figure out what's going on inside the trust., But Wallace says that once you get up to the presidential level, with federal laws, this can't happen easily., So what does it all mean for Mitt Romney?, His blind trust is run by a longtime financial adviser, who might know his likes and dislikes. If Romney were elected president, the campaign has already conceded that he would need to have a stricter blind trust with an outside firm running the money, instead of a close adviser., The many rules mean a lot of work for people like Gross, who consults on blind trusts. But he still tells his clients he doesn't like blind trusts much., He recommends that politicians without a ton of investments simply put their money into plain-vanilla index funds and bonds. Then tell everyone where the money is., That's the route President Obama has taken, judging from his 2011 financial disclosure form (PDF): His investments are primarily in index funds from Vanguard and U.S. Treasury bills and notes.
Waves pound a sea wall in Pacifica, Calif., during a storm in 2010. Small assumptions can make a big difference when putting a price-tag on future disasters., Given a choice between $50 now and $100 in a month, many people would take the money now. But offered $50 in a year, or $100 in 13 months, they'd wait the extra month to double their money., The lesson: People have a present bias, says Frank Partnoy, a professor of law and finance at the University of San Diego. So people have more impatience in a one-month time period than they do in a one-year time period., This turns out to have immense implications for public policy implications that add up to many trillions of dollars over time, and mean the difference between valuing the lives of future generations at a few pennies, or hundreds of billions of dollars., Consider: If it would cost several trillion dollars to save Los Angeles from being wiped off the map by massive floods that are likely to occur only once every few hundred years, is it worth it?, The answer hinges on the discount rate the rate you use to size up future costs., Think of it as reflecting the interest you could earn if you had to put money away today to pay those future bills. A higher rate means you can save less today the future cost is less significant, in today's dollars. A lower rate means the opposite: A huge cost in the future remains huge., Countless personal and public-policy decisions revolve around the discount rate: How much should you put into the college fund? How much should states contribute to public pension plans? How much do we spend now, if anything, to protect LA from that devastating flood?, What discount rate you pick makes a huge difference. Say a catastrophe in 500 years is likely to cost $100 trillion. At a widely used government discount rate of 7 percent, that's worth just 20 cents or so today not really enough to pay attention to., But if you use a rate of 3 percent, today's cost jumps to $38 million. At 2%, it's $5 billion. At a discount rate of 1%, the price-tag at $691 billion serious money even for a wealthy country like the U.S., And, it turns out, when it comes to those really big questions, the answer is about more than just money., On today's show: How much are your many-times-great-grandchildren worth?, Download the Planet Money iPhone App. Music: Charlotte Gainsbourg's Heaven Can Wait. Find us: Twitter/ Facebook/ Spotify/Tumblr.
The health of public pension plans the retirement plans for teachers, firefighters, police officers and other state and local governments has gotten plenty of attention lately., Some plans are hurting, and numbers from state and local governments suggest their public pension plans are underfunded by about $1 trillion., But that gap between what they owe and what they have on hand today is about to look bigger much bigger, in some cases., Take Washington state's retirement system. It has two plans that are not 100 percent funded, says Matt Smith, the state actuary in charge of the plans., Translation: The money in the pension fund right now isn't likely to grow enough over time to meet the retirement promises the state has made to all of its current employees and retirees., That part isn't new. What's changing is the way that number is calculated that gap between tomorrow's obligations and today's investments. The Governmental Accounting Standards Board, GASB, is a nonprofit group that sets guidelines for how state and local governments report their finances, including for their pension plans., GASB is changing the way governments calculate their pension liability. Their change gets at a fundamental question how much money is enough? The way you answer that depends on a single number, called the discount rate. You know that William Carlos Williams poem, 'So much depends on a red wheelbarrow'? says Joshua Rauh, a professor of finance at the Stanford University Graduate School of Business. Yes. Well, in my world it is, 'So much depends on that darn discount rate.' Right now, most cities and states use a number around 8 percent: They assume their investments will earn at least 8 percent per year. Dave Urbanek, director of communications for the Illinois Teachers Retirement System, says there's good reason to use that number. We set the rate of return based on history and practice, Urbanek says. The TRS assumed rate of investment return is 8.5 percent over 30 years. And over the last 30 years, our actual rate of return has been 9.3 percent., But Rauh says it doesn't matter what returns have been historically. Assuming that past good returns will continue is risky he says there's a good chance returns could worsen, and that pension assets won't perform., GASB seems to agree. It's changing its guidelines on what the discount rate should be. Under the new guidelines, some states and cities can no longer use that simple 8 percent number. The rules get complicated, but in certain situations, they'll need to use a much lower number a rate as low as 5 percent. And the number you use makes a big difference. A pension fund that seems OK with an 8 percent expected rate of return doesn't seem so great at 5 percent. (The lower the rate, the more you have to sock away today to pay the same pensions in 30 years.) And if you are a pension fund that is already in trouble, this change is the last thing you need. Take the Illinois Teachers Retirement System again, which has less than half the amount it needs to pay current and future retirees over the next 30 years. Urbanek says the fund is actually 53.5 percent short of what it needs., But that number was calculated under the current guidelines, using a discount rate of 8 percent. Under the new guidelines, it's likely to get worse. I mean, what's happening is that I've got a burn on my arm, Urbanek says. EMT tells me third-degree burn. I go into the doctor's office and he tells me it's a fourth-degree burn. We have a problem. Depending on how you calculate it depends on how big the problem is. Urbanek worries this change will undermine people's faith in the retirement system. Josh Raus and GASB say it's time to lay the cards on the table so everyone can see them. They say changing this number doesn't change economic reality it just better reflects what that economic reality is.
Stunted corn grows in a field next to a cattle feed lot in rural Springfield, Omaha, Neb., Stunted corn grows in a field next to a cattle feed lot in rural Springfield, Omaha, Neb., We often talk about the farm lobby as though farmers spoke with a unified voice. And it's true, they usually try to., But an unusually bitter and public fight is breaking out right now between the farmers who grow corn and other farmers who need to buy that corn., There are two reasons. The first is the drought that's killing corn and soybean fields across the Midwest, sending feed prices are soaring and fraying the nerves of livestock producers, who are wondering whether they'll even manage to stay in business., The second reason is ethanol., Farmers who raise America's cattle, hogs, and chickens never appreciated Washington's infatuation with biofuels especially ethanol that's produced from corn. After all, when the government nudges more corn toward ethanol factories, it means that there's less available for animals. Last year, in fact, 40 percent of the country's corn harvest went to ethanol production., In good years, when corn is plentiful and prices stay low, no one complains too much., In bad years, though .... well, this morning, a coalition of groups representing America's livestock and chicken farmers delivered an angry attack on the Renewable Fuel Standard, which requires gasoline companies to buy a minimum amount of ethanol 13 billion gallons this year and blend it into gasoline supplies. The groups released a new study that argues that this ethanol mandate does very little good: It increases the cost of gasoline and makes the country no less dependent on energy imports., Even worse, the meat producers say, it creates unfair competition for corn. The mandate forces gasoline companies to buy billions of gallons of ethanol that they don't even want, driving corn prices through the ceiling and potentially forcing livestock producers into bankruptcy., Of course, corn farmers see nothing at all wrong with soaring prices and a guaranteed market for their harvest. Gary Niemeyer, president of the National Corn Growers Association immediately came to the defense of ethanol mandates. Now is not the time for changes. It's working, he wrote in a statement to the press. Now more than ever, U.S. agriculture needs to pull together., The Environmental Protection Agency, which oversees the renewable fuel program, could step in and reduce the amount of ethanol that gasoline companies are required to blend into fuel this year. But Wallace Tyner, an expert on ethanol markets at Purdue University, says that's extremely unlikely, and wouldn't have much effect anyway. Gasoline companies are well on their way to fulfilling their requirements for 2012 already., The real battle, he says, will be fought over ethanol production next year. If the drought continues, and corn prices rise even more, gasoline companies won't want to buy that expensive ethanol, and livestock producers will be fighting for their survival. And the EPA will face intense pressures to cut the safety net for ethanol producers. It is expected to announce its ethanol requirements for 2013 in November.
A marijuana cigarette in British Columbia. Our panel of economists agrees that criminalizing pot is a huge waste of resources., A marijuana cigarette in British Columbia. Our panel of economists agrees that criminalizing pot is a huge waste of resources., Tuesday's show presented the common-sense, no-nonsense Planet Money economic plan backed by economists of all stripes, but probably toxic to any candidate that might endorse it., You can still listen to the show, but we've had some requests for a post with our six-step plan spelled out in brief., So here they are, along with a few words about each of the economists who helped craft it:, One: Eliminate the mortgage tax deduction, which lets homeowners deduct the interest they pay on their mortgages. Gone. After all, big houses get bigger tax breaks, driving up prices for everyone. Why distort the housing market and subsidize people buying expensive houses?, Two: End the tax deduction companies get for providing health-care to employees. Neither employees nor employers pay taxes on workplace health insurance benefits. That encourages fancier insurance coverage, driving up usage and, therefore, health costs overall. Eliminating the deduction will drive up costs for people with workplace healthcare, but makes the health-care market fairer., Three: Eliminate the corporate income tax. Completely. If companies reinvest the money into their businesses, that's good. Don't tax companies in an effort to tax rich people., Four: Eliminate all income and payroll taxes. All of them. For everyone. Taxes discourage whatever you're taxing, but we like income, so why tax it? Payroll taxes discourage creating jobs. Not such a good idea. Instead, impose a consumption tax, designed to be progressive to protect lower-income households., Five: Tax carbon emissions. Yes, that means higher gasoline prices. It's a kind of consumption tax, and can be structured to make sure it doesn't disproportionately harm lower-income Americans. More, it's taxing something that's bad, which gives people an incentive to stop polluting., Six: Legalize marijuana. Stop spending so much trying to put pot users and dealers in jail it costs a lot of money to catch them, prosecute them, and then put them up in jail. Criminalizing drugs also drives drug prices up, making gang leaders rich., There you have it, six major proposals that have broad agreement, at least among economists. Though we should note that there were some pretty significant quibbles about just how to implement the income-tax and carbon-tax proposals., Dean Baker, co-director of the Center for Economic and Policy Research in Washington, D.C., and widely published blo You could probably describe me as left of center. It'd be fair., Russ Roberts, George Mason University economics professor. In the grand spectrum of economic policy, I'm a pretty hard core free market guy. I'm probably called a libertarian., Katherine Baicker, professor of health economics at Harvard University's Department of Health Policy and Management. We simply called her a centrist on the show., Luigi Zingales, professor of entrepreneurship and finance and the University of Chicago's Booth School of Business. What I like to say is that I'm pro-market, but not necessarily pro-business., Robert Frank, professor of management and economics at Cornell University's Johnson Graduate School of Management. I'm a registered Democrat. I think of myself as a radical pragmatist., , Note: This post was updated to make clear that the income tax would be replaced with a consumption tax. That's in the original show, but was inadvertently omitted from the summary above. Sorry for the confusion!
Warning that a fuel line could leak, potentially resulting in an underhood fire, Ford Motor Co. today told owners of about 11,500 model year 2013 Escapes to stop driving their vehicles and to immediately contact their dealers., The company said that dealers will deliver a loaner vehicle to customers and will then transport their 2013 Escape to the dealership until the repair has been completed., Ford's Escape was redesigned for the 2013 model year. Last month, this one rolled of the assembly line in Louisville, Ky., There have been no injuries reported in connection with the problem, the company said., The 2013 Escape models involved have 1.6-liter engines. Models with larger engines are not involved., Reuters notes that it is extremely rare for an automaker to warn drivers to stop driving their recalled vehicles.
Monument to headier times: The euro logo outside the European Central Bank in Frankfurt. The International Monetary Fund has warned of possible deflation in parts of Europe., Monument to headier times: The euro logo outside the European Central Bank in Frankfurt. The International Monetary Fund has warned of possible deflation in parts of Europe., On Wednesday, investors paid Germany to hold on to their money for a couple years., That's right: Germany got to borrow more than 4 billion euros (about $5 billion), and instead of Germany paying interest to its lenders, the lenders are paying Germany. This a lot like Citibank paying you a smidgen to carry a balance on your credit card or to take out a loan (without also charging you interest)., Germany is just the latest country to get what's called a negative yield on its debt. The phenomenon is still rare, but France, Belgium, Denmark and Finland are among countries that have been paid recently to borrow for shorter terms, six months, for example., Still, selling two-year bonds at a negative yield is remarkable., As so often happens with unusual economic developments, there are a few possible explanations, ranging from optimistic to pessimistic to scary., First, the mechanics. National governments hold auctions periodically to borrow money from investors by selling bonds. Those bonds pay investors a given interest rate, or yield., The precise process differs a little, but the gist is that the investors bid by saying what interest rate they're willing to receive as compensation for parking their money with the government., In this case, as with the previous examples, investors told Germany they'd be willing to pay it a little bit to hold their money. They won't pay much: The yield is negative 0.06 percent, which means they're paying Germany a little less than many U.S. banks pay customers on savings accounts. But it's still a distinct difference from the normal scenario, where the government pays bond investors., So what's happening? Three possible scenarios stand out. First, this could be what economists call a flight to quality. With other European countries looking shakier think not just Greece, but Spain, Portugal, Italy and more investors are willing to take a lower return now for a greater likelihood that they'll be paid back in full later., They could invest in U.S. Treasury bonds, and many people are doing so (pushing Treasury yields to historic lows). But if you make your money in euros, investing in dollars means taking on another kind of risk: The relationship between the euro and the dollar could change while you're holding the bonds, reducing your return., To avoid that, invest your euros in the safest euro-denominated bonds you can find like Germany's, perhaps, even if it costs a bit., The flip side is that this could reflect what's called a macro bet on the European economy relative to the world's. If an investor feels that fears about the euro's undoing have become overblown, it might make sense to take U.S. dollars (or Japanese yen or funds in some other currency), and invest them in euro-denominated bonds., Even if they pay a little bit for the privilege, they could win when they convert their euros back into dollars (or whatever) down the road, assuming the euro has strengthened again relative to the original currency., In other words, under these two scenarios, Germany's negative yield could reflect growing fears about other European economies better to pay Germany a little now than lose more later or confidence in the euro and European economy generally, relative to countries outside the eurozone., Investors act independently, of course, so Germany's lower yield could reflect a combination of these two strategies, by different investors., But there's a third and potentially unsettling possibility: deflation. In a way, this is a bleaker version of the first, pessimistic scenario., Deflation, of course, is the opposite of inflation: a destabilizing spiral of falling prices. Very roughly, everyone waits to buy things (cellphones, cars, houses) because they expect prices to fall. That can become a self-fulfilling prophecy if enough people do it. It sounds great, but it also means companies earn less and start to shed jobs, leaving consumers with less money and a renewed incentive to postpone purchases., If investors think this is going to happen, the euro could start to get more valuable over time falling prices mean each euro could buy more. Then, paying a little now to hold German bonds might not be so bad, because it's a way of holding euros safely while they rise in value because of deflation. The rise in the value of the currency could offset whatever interest the bondholders must pay in the meantime., In other words, the real interest rate the rate after inflation or deflation is still positive, and investors still make money., And sure enough, an International Monetary Fund report on Wednesday called the risk of deflation significant in the periphery of Europe (think: Italy)., The European Central Bank still has tools in its arsenal to fight deflation, chief among them printing money. And the IMF is encouraging the bank to buy huge amounts of government bonds, flooding the economy with euros in the process, which would tend to favor inflation (and thus counteract deflation)., It remains to be seen which of these scenarios is borne out.
GOP presidential candidate Mitt Romney speaks at a campaign rally in Bowling Green, Ohio, on Wednesday., President Obama's campaign continues to hammer presumptive Republican nominee Mitt Romney over the GOP challenger's refusal to release more of his tax returns. Romney has provided one year's record and promised a second year's worth of returns. But even some of his fellow Republicans now say that's not enough., Obama's campaign launched a new TV ad this week, shining a spotlight on what is and isn't known about Romney's taxes, asking, What is Mitt Romney hiding?, So far, Romney and his family trusts have released their 2010 tax returns, which fill hundreds of pages. He got an extension for his 2011 return and has promised to release that as soon as it's ready, no later than mid-October., Romney says that should be enough., People always want to get more. We're putting out what's required, plus more, he said last week on CNN. Those are the two years that people will have, and that's all that's necessary for people to understand something about my finances., Retirement Account, But tax professionals still have plenty of questions. For example, Lee Sheppard, a contributing editor at the journal Tax Notes, wants to know how Romney amassed so much money in his tax-deferred retirement account., All we know is really that it's a big number, and we're a little bit baffled as to how it got so big, Sheppard says., Candidates list their assets in broad ranges, so we know Romney's retirement account is worth somewhere between $21 million and $102 million. Law professor Ed Kleinbard of the University of Southern California says that's a lot of money considering the most Romney could ever contribute to the account was $30,000 a year., Either Gov. Romney is sort of the modern-day equivalent of Jack and his magic beans, who somehow created a mighty beanstalk, or he took a very aggressive position with respect to valuing insider stock, Kleinbard says., Kleinbard means that Romney might have loaded up his retirement account with assets from his private equity firm, Bain Capital, and assigned artificially low values to those assets in order to get around the federal contribution limits., If so, Romney would still have to pay taxes on the real value of the assets when they're withdrawn from the account. But in the meantime, the money can grow tax-free. Tax Notes' Sheppard says that's an advantage most taxpayers don't have., If you happen to work for a partnership and your compensation is arranged this way, you get this very beneficial treatment, Sheppard says., Romney's campaign didn't respond to NPR's questions about his retirement account. But his taxes have been dogging the candidate since the GOP primary. At an NBC debate in January, Romney argued that there's nothing wrong with minimizing taxes., I pay all the taxes that are legally required and not a dollar more, he said. I don't think you want someone as the candidate for president who pays more taxes than he owes., Role At Marriott, Romney was equally aggressive toward taxes in the business world. For years, he was a director of Marriott International, the hotel company founded by Willard Marriott. Kleinbard, who worked on Wall Street and served as chief of staff for Congress' Joint Committee on Taxation, says Marriott had a reputation., Marriott was always a tax shelter promoter's first call, he says. Marriott was one of those companies that just loved to buy tax shelters., Bloomberg reported this year on one Marriott tax shelter, known as Son of BOSS. It involved creating paper losses to offset taxes on real income. The Internal Revenue Service challenged the shelter, and Marriott lost in court. Judges called the shelter fictitious and a scheme, and the company was forced to pay $29 million. Kleinbard notes that when the shelter was adopted, Romney was the chairman of Marriott's audit committee., It's the job of the chair of the audit committee of Marriott to say, 'Hey, wait a minute, just because we have an opinion from Winkin', Blinkin' and Nod saying that this is a terribly clever idea, I need to apply some common sense as opposed to just signing on the bottom line,' Kleinbard says., A statement from Marriott says the company only engages in tax deals it believes are lawful., Marriott only engages in transactions that we believe are in accordance with the tax code and that we think will create shareholder value, it said., Kleinbard sees a pattern for Romney of cutting tax corners. Asked about his taxes in that NBC debate, Romney sidestepped., The real question is not so much my taxes, but the taxes of the American people, Romney said., Romney, whose 2010 tax rate was less than 14 percent, says he wants to overhaul the tax code, which he calls far too complex, far too intrusive and far too great.
US Airways CEO Doug Parker waits to be introduced prior to his address to a National Press Club Newsmaker Luncheon in Washington, DC., US Airways CEO Doug Parker waits to be introduced prior to his address to a National Press Club Newsmaker Luncheon in Washington, DC., Could it be that American Airlines CEO Tom Horton is resisting the warm embrace of US Airways CEO Doug Parker over a little thing like money?, During a National Press Club luncheon Wednesday, Parker didn't exactly shoot down suggestions that American's leadership has been stalling on a merger of the two carriers because of the potential for personal gain., Asked whether Horton is focused on the payday he would get if American were to remain independent a while longer, Parker hesitated. For more than 8 seconds, his answer was: Um. The. Uh. Let's see., Then Parker plunged ahead. I find it noteworthy that the only opposition that seems to exist to this merger is the senior management at American, he said. I don't want to guess why., Parker's halting response came when he was asked about reports questioning Horton's initial negative reaction to a merger that Wall Street analysts generally agree is both desirable and inevitable. US Airways, the country's fourth-largest airline, wants to merge with American, the third largest airline, to better compete with the top two giants, United and Delta., But Horton has argued that American should emerge from its bankruptcy filing as a stand alone company. Recently, the airline said it would study various merger possibilities., A recent Dealbook column in The New York Times said American executives may be resisting a speedy, slam-dunk deal with US Airways for a good reason: a giant payday. Mr. Horton and his management team stand to receive somewhere between $300 million and $600 million if he can make it through bankruptcy court without merging first with a rival like US Airways., US Airways says its proposal is the right fit, and would work well only under the protection of a bankruptcy court., US Airways is here now and ready to get this done, and there is no guarantee that will be the case forever, Parker said., At the Press Club's head table, Parker invited as his guests the top officials from unions representing pilots, ground workers and flight attendants at American. Those unions support the merger idea., Bruce Hicks, a spokesman for American Airlines, defended the company., Any equity grants upon emergence would be subject to approval by multiple parties with a direct interest in the impact on value allocation, he said in a statement. Any suggestion that management compensation would influence decisions about the best outcome for the company's stakeholders is simply wrong., Separately on Wednesday, American's parent company, AMR Corp. reported a second-quarter loss of $241 million, an improvement over last year's loss of $286 million in the same period. Most of this year's losses were tied to bankruptcy costs. Revenues set a quarterly record at $6.46 billion., In a letter to employees Wednesday, Horton said the company was well on our way toward building the new American., AMR filed for bankruptcy in November, following losses of about $10 billion over a decade.
The federal government's new consumer protection bureau notched its first major enforcement action today. Capital One Financial has agreed to shell out $210 million to settle allegations that it tricked credit card customers into buying unwanted services mostly credit insurance and similar products while activating credit cards., The allegations come from the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, which was created by the sweeping Dodd-Frank financial regulation bill, and also the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, which is Capital One's primary banking regulator. You can read separate press releases on the settlement from the CFPB and the OCC., Settlements with big companies always sound big: $210 million is serious money for most of us., But it's worth keeping in mind that the big banks are really big. When Goldman Sachs agreed to pay $550 million almost exactly two years ago to settle charges that it misled investors over complex mortgage investment, some critics argued it amounted to a slap on the wrist., Capital One isn't quite as big as Goldman Sachs, but it's still pretty big., The banking company reported profits of about $1.4 billion for the first three months of this year. That's roughly 6.6 times the penalties and refunds it's paying for business practices since August 2010. (Capital One announced considerably lower second-quarter earnings today, a total it said was skewed by accounting adjustments and other unusual factors.), At the same time, compared just to the company's credit card business, the payout announced today is more significant. During the first three months of this year, Capital One reported roughly $566 million as coming from its credit card business., In other words, the fines and refunds amount to a little over a third of the company's credit card profits for the first quarter of the year. It's not a crippling hit, but it's not trivial either. (These figures take into account only Capital One's continuing operations i.e., they exclude business lines the company no longer operates primarily because that's the only way Capital One reports its credit card results.), Capital One, in its press release on the settlement, blamed the problems on third party vendors [that] did not always adhere to company sales scripts and sales policies, but acknowledges that the bank didn't keep a close enough eye on vendors. We are accountable for the actions that vendors take on our behalf, a company executive says in the release., It's worth noting that the bulk of the settlement, or $150 million, is slated to go to consumers. The consumer protection bureau notes that $140 million will go to 2 million customers, which works out to about $70 apiece. The agency has posted an explanation of how these payments will be made.
Raquel Rodriguez and Sylvia Barrios work at Yo Mama's Catering Cooperative, the first worker-owned catering business in Austin, Tx., Raquel Rodriguez and Sylvia Barrios work at Yo Mama's Catering Cooperative, the first worker-owned catering business in Austin, Tx., In the documentary Fixing the Future, reporter David Brancaccio traveled across America to talk to people who are working to reinvent the American economy. Through innovative approaches to creating jobs and wealth like time banking, worker cooperatives, local currencies and community banking Americans are rethinking how we measure prosperity and calculate GDP., NPR's Jennifer Ludden talks with Brancaccio about new experiments in the economy of the future.
Friday's pieces on the Red Cross and the lasting harm it suffered after it briefly charged soldiers for doughnuts during World War II drew a big response. (A longer version made up the bulk of Friday's show, while a shorter version aired that afternoon on All Things Considered.), Two of the emails we got stood out, one of them because it underscored the incredible staying power of the mistrust that grew out of the Red Cross's decision., That point came from Eugenia Potter, who emailed from Portland, Ore., to tell of her own experience after Hurricane Katrina, when she considered donating to the Red Cross. And despite being far too young to remember the events of World War II,, ... several people suggested that I not do that, because 'they charged for all the things they gave out at disasters, even the coffee.' One person added that the Red Cross charges recipients for the blood that people have donated in blood drives!, As we mentioned in the original pieces, the Red Cross no longer charges military personnel, and hasn't for decades. Its disaster services are also free. It does charge hospitals for donated blood, but explains on its Myths and Legends page that it does so to recover the expense of collecting and distributing the blood, including testing, storage and transportation costs., Mary Humelsine, from Neptune, N.J., emailed with a different story, about her still-vigorous 93-year-old father, who to this day holds the Salvation Army in high regard in his case, for the unexpected arrival of free socks and chocolate bars many years ago., It goes back to his own experience in an engineering company during World War II, in August 1943, on New Georgia in the Solomon Islands., His unit was trying to reach an airstrip used to refuel Japanese planes, and it reached a former plantation. Mary taped his recollections a few years ago, and sent us this excerpt:, There was a hill there, and we were going around it, and a [bull]dozer just stuck his nose around the corner of the hill, when he started getting artillery fire. So we pulled back to get the cover of the hill. All of a sudden, this jeep drives up to us, and it's a Salvation Army guy. And, he's got socks and Nestle candy bars. That's the first socks we've had any change of clothes we've had in three weeks. (Laughs) The socks [we had been wearing] didn't have much foot in 'em. I've always given to the Salvation Army at Christmastime.
There's more evidence that the housing sector is on the mend and may be the sector of the economy that's got the most going for it these days., According to the Census Bureau and Department of Housing and Urban Development there was a 6.9 percent increase in housing starts last month. At an annual rate of 760,000, ground-breaking for construction of single-family homes, apartments and condominiums the pace hit a four-year high, The Associated Press says., As Eyder reported last Wednesday, The Wall Street Journalhas already concluded that the U.S. housing bust is over and that housing is unlikely to drag the U.S. economy down further., In Phoenix earlier this month, workers were framing this new home., Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke will get another chance to share his thoughts about how the economy is doing this morning at 10 a.m. ET when he testifies before the House Committee on Financial Services. Tuesday, when he appeared before the Senate Banking, Housing &amp; Urban Affairs Committee, he painted a rather glum picture., Bernanke did note, though, that:, We have seen modest signs of improvement in housing. In part because of historically low mortgage rates, both new and existing home sales have been gradually trending upward since last summer, and some measures of house prices have turned up in recent months. Construction has increased, especially in the multifamily sector., The Fed chairman added, however, that:, A number of factors continue to impede progress in the housing market. On the demand side, many would-be buyers are deterred by worries about their own finances or about the economy more generally. Other prospective homebuyers cannot obtain mortgages due to tight lending standards, impaired creditworthiness, or because their current mortgages are underwater&mdash;that is, they owe more than their homes are worth. On the supply side, the large number of vacant homes, boosted by the ongoing inflow of foreclosed properties, continues to divert demand from new construction.
David Bagley, HSBC's head of group compliance, resigned in the middle of a Senate hearing today that was looking into charges that the bank had been lax in meeting government requirements, allowing Mexican cartels to launder money and giving terrorists access to the American banking system., Bloomberg reports:, Bagley was among at least six HSBC executives who testified before the Senate's Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations today after the panel released a 335-page report describing a decade of compliance failures by Europe's biggest bank. London- based HSBC enabled drug lords to launder money in Mexico, did business with firms linked to terrorism and concealed transactions that bypassed U.S. sanctions against Iran, Senate investigators said in the report., 'As I have thought about the structural transformation of the bank's compliance function, I recommended to the group that now is the appropriate time for me and for the bank for someone new to serve as the head of group compliance,' Bagley said. 'I have agreed to work with the bank's senior management towards an orderly transition of this important role.', The Wall Street Journal reports that the investigation focused a lot of attention on the Mexican side. It noted that HSBC's Mexican arm sent up to $4 billion in bank notes by car or aircraft to the HSBC bank in the U.S., U.S. authorities have flagged such volume of bulk cash shipments for scrutiny, in part because drug cartels are believed to use such flows of money to hide illicit proceeds, the Journal reports., According to The Telegraph, Stuart Gulliver, chief executive of HSBC, issued an apology., We have sometimes failed to meet the standards regulators and customer expect... we take responsibility for fixing what went wrong, he said., The Telegraph adds that HSBC will likely face a hefty fine of up to $1 billion.
On Monday, a weed was growing through the dry earth at Marion Kujawa's pond, which he normally uses to water the cattle on his farm in Ashley, Ill., On Monday, a weed was growing through the dry earth at Marion Kujawa's pond, which he normally uses to water the cattle on his farm in Ashley, Ill., With about 55 percent of the continental U.S. suffering from moderate to extreme drought conditions the nation is withering under conditions that haven't been this bad since 1956, according to a new report from National Climatic Data Center., And this worst-in-a-generation drought from Indiana to Arkansas to California is damaging crops and rural economies and threatening to drive food prices to record levels, Bloomberg News warns., The redder the area, the worst the drought., The redder the area, the worst the drought., That's bad news for a U.S. economy still struggling to gain strength. As Bloomberg notes, agriculture has been one of the most resilient industries in the past three years. But now, that sector is facing an awful time. Already, the U.S. Agriculture Department has designated 1,016 counties in 26 states as natural disaster areas meaning hard-hit farmers in those areas can apply for low-interest emergency loans from USDA. According to Bloomberg, that's the biggest such declaration ever., What's more, the drought could get a lot worse before it gets better, says Joe Glauber, chief economist at the Agriculture Department, in this morning's Washington Post. There's no relief likely this week. The Post says that:, Forecasters expect a high-pressure area to remain entrenched over the Rockies and central United States. As a result, any storm systems will probably track across southern Canada, missing the worst-affected areas., The bottom line: No significant rain is expected., And it's going to be very hot in large parts of the nation again today and the rest of this week. Weatherunderground.com's current severe weather map shows heat advisories in states from Iowa and Missouri east through Pennsylvania and up into New England., Weather Underground's Jeff Masters adds that the costs associated with this drought are certain to be many billions of dollars, and the disaster could be one of the top 10 most expensive weather-related disasters in U.S. history. As he points out, droughts historically have been some of the costliest U.S. weather disasters., Update at 4:03 p.m. ET. It Started Promising: , Bryn Bird, a second generation farmer from central Ohio, tells All Things Considered's Robert Siegel that this spring looked promising. She said it was mild and many farmers had an early start. , But, now, it looks like most of their sweet corn crop will be lost to drought. , That means that Bird and her family will take a $30,000 to $40,000 loss., For a family farm, she said, that's a significant loss., Also, she said, because sweet corn is not a commodity crop, it can't be insured. , If the drought continues, Bird said, the sweet corn could become livestock feed. Her family, she said, has also turned to growing more tomatoes to deal with the drought. , More of Robert's conversation with Bird will air on tonight's All Things Considered.
Observations from the Not-So-Empty Nest, by Sally Koslow, Hardcover, 258 pages | purchase, More on this book:, A few years back, Sally Koslow was settling into an empty nest. Her two 20-something sons were launched out of the house and into the wider world. Then, suddenly and unexpectedly, her sons landed back home. She was startled and depressed to learn they were part of a much larger trend., According to the Pew Research Center, one-fifth of young adults aged 25-34 live in multigenerational households. The bad economy is the main contributing factor, but the trend also reflects shifts in social norms., In her book Slouching Toward Adulthood, Koslow explores these changes and presents her research and interviews on the phase she calls adultescence., When young people come back, she tells NPR's Jennifer Ludden, there's a tendency for parents to treat them the way that they treated them when they were teenagers instead of establishing new boundaries, and it's not a pretty picture., Koslow talks with Ludden about how to make the best of living with adult children., On adjusting expectations in the 'not-so-empty nest', Many people find it very hard because some mothers kick right back into mothering mode and really kick it up a notch in their worrying about ... their daughter's driving late at night. And they're frustrated if their kids don't, you know, if they're coming home for dinner. Can they plan a family dinner? Some parents think of this as ... a really cozy stroll down Sesame Street. And the kids really don't want to be with them, and so the parents are disappointed., On laying down financial boundaries, Sally Koslow is the author of the novels The Late, Lamented Molly Marx, With Friends Like These and Little Pink Slips., Sally Koslow is the author of the novels The Late, Lamented Molly Marx, With Friends Like These and Little Pink Slips., Sometimes, parents disagree about how much help they should offer. And sometimes, financially, it's rough because ... the parents are dipping into their future retirement resources to help kids go back to college or to ... give them, let's say, a car., ... I think these are very personal decisions. Sometimes, it's just between the parents. And sometimes, it's the parents and a financial adviser, who have to be very frank with them and say, you cannot ... pay for law school if you're going to retire in a few years. Many people in the country have lost their jobs or they've seen the portfolio seriously compromised. And as loving parents, they want to be generous, but they may have to suggest the kids take out loans. And it's very complicated., On the causes of the trend, I'm not necessarily blaming anybody. But if there's blame ... much of it can squarely sit on the shoulders of people like me and other baby-boomer parents who try to create lives for their children that offer their kids only the best, and sent the message that only the best would be acceptable., And these kids slammed into an economy where many, many people are unemployed. Many people are carrying enormous amounts of student debt. The new entry-level job is very often the unpaid internship. ... It's really a difficult picture. But parents have really helped their kids into believing that they were perfect little snowflakes who would be able to wait for the right thing to come along. And some of the young people are waiting and waiting and waiting. And in the meantime, time is not standing still, and opportunities are passing them by., Read an excerpt of Slouching Toward Adulthood
The marble statue of Plato stands in front of the Athens Academy in Athens. The ancient Greek philosopher had his doubts about democracy., The marble statue of Plato stands in front of the Athens Academy in Athens. The ancient Greek philosopher had his doubts about democracy., High-profile experts are staging two separate Washington press conferences Tuesday to demand action on public-debt problems. One group is targeting state budget crises; the other, the federal budget mess., If the ancient Greek philosopher Plato were still alive, he might hold a third press conference to declare: It's hopeless. I told you so. Democracy will always degenerate into chaos because people will vote for their immediate self interests, not the long-term good., At a time when nearly every major democracy in the world is facing a debt crisis, some people are wondering: Might Plato be right?, And if voters keep electing leaders who can't balance budgets, what happens next? (SPOILER ALERT: If you believe Plato, you won't like where this story is heading)., The seriousness of the public-debt crisis was underscored Tuesday when the nonpartisan State Budget Crisis Task Force released a report assessing the fiscal health of states in the wake of the Great Recession., States are grappling with unprecedented fiscal crises, the experts found., The task force, led by former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker and former New York Lt. Gov. Richard Ravitch, concluded that many budgets are so out of whack that states are facing major threats to their ability to provide basic services to the public, invest for the future and care for the needy., Source: Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, Credit: Alyson Hurt / NPR, Also Tuesday, Erskine Bowles, who co-chaired the bipartisan presidential deficit commission in 2010, announced that a group of budget experts are launching a campaign to spur Congress to immediately address the fiscal cliff. That term refers to a huge cluster of tax and spending changes set to take effect at year's end. Economists say that if Congress does nothing, the changes now set on autopilot are so drastic they will jolt the U.S. economy and shove it over a cliff into recession., Bowles is a director of the nonpartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, which is now kicking off its Campaign to Fix the Debt. The committee's latest report concludes that if lawmakers fail to act, it could lead to a loss of confidence in their ability to govern that could set off a dangerous chain reaction in markets., Meanwhile, a debt crisis is dragging Europe and maybe the whole global economy into recession., A Problem Around The World, Debt is not just a Western problem. For example, in Japan the debt load is more than double the size of the country's entire gross domestic product., What's going on? Can't self-governing people govern?, Plato may have gotten there first, but many people have followed up, asking just that question. Back in 1978, Auburn University professor Robert Ekelund co-authored a paper entitled Deficits and Democracy., His historical research, done along with W. Mark Crain, also a professor, found that all over the world, no matter what the culture or continent, democratic governments have exhibited tendencies to run perennial budgetary deficits., That's because the people who win elections often are those who promise what voters would like: lower taxes or more public services, such as better roads and more police. Once in office, a lawmaker discovers that in financing the desired output of the public sector, the politician [must choose between] raising taxes versus borrowing funds, the professors wrote., The easier choice is to borrow and pass the cost to a future generation that does not yet vote, the paper said., Put Limits On Leaders?, The researchers concluded voters must impose restrictions upon elected officials in the form of balanced-budget amendments or pay-as-you-go legislative rules, which require tax hikes or spending cuts whenever new programs are added., Ekelund, now in his 70s, is retired. The budget deficits he worried about decades ago are much worse today. In an interview, he said voters should have heeded his warnings and pushed for constitutional or legislative restraints on running deficits., When you bring public choice into the matter, there is a built-in bias to create deficits, he said., But another professor has reached a different conclusion after studying historical outcomes. University of Virginia law professor Richard Schragger examined the massive budget deficits of cities and states in the 19th century. He found that fiscal mismanagement was far worse then. For example, in 1841-42, nine states defaulted on their debts, as did hundreds of cities during the 1800s., Public services were reduced and infrastructure projects had to be scuttled, state and municipal property had to be sold off, and in some cases bondholders never got paid, Schragger wrote in a Yale Law Journal essay, Democracy and Debt., And the 20th century had some spectacular fiscal messes, too. In the mid-1970s, New York City needed billions of dollars in federal loans to work itself out of a hole., Schragger says those examples show that when facing calamity, voters are willing to elect reformers and soldier on through booms and busts. That messy process serves the public better than the strict imposition of tight restraints to stop all deficits, he said., For example, in hard times, voters might want to elect leaders who will create road-building jobs to help boost spending. Constitutional constraints are, by definition, limits on the regular representative political process, Schragger said., In an interview, Schragger said that while voters have proved they can solve problems, tyrants are far from a safe fiscal bet. Indeed, American colonists overthrew their British king because they felt his tax policies were not sound. It would surprise me if autocratic regimes are more fiscally responsible over time, compared with elected leaders who must answer to voters, Schragger said., How About Letting Voters Decide How To Spend?, Some pro-democracy groups say that the solution to budget problems is to have even more democracy. They support a citizen-engagement movement known as participatory budgeting. The practice began in Brazil in 1989 and has spread to many communities around the world., Supporters say state and federal government should provide grants to allow direct voting on what local communities might want. For example, in Chicago's 49th Ward, residents recently were allowed to vote directly on how to spend $1.3 million, rather than wait for city or state officials to make all decisions. Voters chose sidewalk repairs and streetlights., That kind of direct democracy and participatory budgeting could help voters better understand and solve budgeting problems, supporters say., But Plato? He concluded that democracy invariably must crumble because citizens are fundamentally indifferent to the greater good. In time, tyrants take over., In the United States, that has not been the outcome so far. Having learned from King George in 1776, they know a king could spend you into ruin too, Schragger said.
Mitt Romney leaves a fundraiser in Baton Rouge, La., on Monday., Mitt Romney leaves a fundraiser in Baton Rouge, La., on Monday., Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney continued Tuesday to push back on calls to release more years of tax returns and defended keeping investments in offshore accounts both issues that have been dogging his run for the White House., In an interview with Robert Costa of the conservative National Review, Romney said he won't release pre-2010 tax returns, despite urging from those within his own party, because he says he believes the Obama campaign would use them to distract from the failure of the president to reignite our economy., And, then, this:, And I'm simply not enthusiastic about giving them hundreds or thousands of more pages to pick through, distort and lie about., When Costa pressed Romney about why, from a political perspective, he hasn't closed his offshore accounts, which his opponents have also targeted, Romney tried to distance himself from the nature of his financial holdings by noting they are managed in a blind trust. More Romney:, The decisions made by the trustee are the decisions that determine where the investments are., As has been reported in recent months, and also during his 2008 presidential run, Romney referred to Sen. Edward Kennedy's use of a blind trust to manage his money as an age-old ruse during the 1994 Massachusetts Senate race., Here's what Romney told The Boston Globe in 1994:, You give a blind trust rules. You can say to a blind trust, don't invest in properties which would be in conflict of interest or where the seller might think they're going to get an advantage from me., In his interview Tuesday, Romney also defended his offshore accounts as a vehicle through which foreign investment can flow to companies in the U.S., This is how Romney explained it:, The so-called offshore accounts in the Cayman Islands, for instance, is an account established by a U.S. firm to allow foreign investors to invest in U.S. enterprises and not be subject to taxes outside of their own jurisdiction. So in many instances, the investments in something of that nature are brought back into the United States. The world of finance is not as simple as some would have you believe. Sometimes a foreign entity is formed to allow foreign investors to invest in the United States, which may well be the case with the entities that Democrats are describing as foreign accounts., Romney revealed little else during his interview with Costa, saying that what he's looking for in those he's considering for vice president are people with the capacity to lead, who share my philosophy, and, in some cases, people who provide perspectives and skills that I may not share., He said his experience at Bain prepared him for the presidency by giving him an understanding of how business decisions are made, as well as an understanding about the actions that are destructive to job creation and the actions that encourage job creation., Asked by Costa why he's going to Europe next week, Romney said, Foreign affairs and associations with foreign leaders are an important part of the presidency, a position I hope to achieve., Update at 5:45 p.m. EDT. 'National Review' Editorial Urges Romney To Release Returns, 'Move On', Later Tuesday, the editors of the National Review called on Romney to release his tax returns, respond to attacks and move on., We doubt that there is anything truly surprising in Romney's additional personal tax returns, they wrote in an online editorial. We already know that he has made vast amounts of money, that he gives generously to his church and to charities, that he has set up trusts for his family, that he maintains bank accounts and investments overseas, and that he takes advantages of such benefits as are available to him under our ridiculously complex tax code., But there is no scandal in that. Romney is a wealthy man and he has complicated personal finances, something that is typical of wealthy men., Releasing pre-2010 returns, they said, would allow him to focus on where he wants to take the country., By drawing out the argument over the returns, the editors wrote, Romney is playing into the president's hands., They also dismissed Romney's defense that he has released as many returns as Democratic presidential candidate John Kerry did in 2004 and that Kerry's wealthy wife, Teresa Heinz Kerry, released none., Neither is an apt comparison, the editors said. They noted that when Kerry was running for president, he released returns from 1999 through 2003, and had already released tax returns during his Senate runs., As for Teresa Heinz, the editors said, Romney isn't the wealthy spouse of a candidate, but the candidate himself.
The U.S. economy has continued to recover, but economic activity appears to have decelerated somewhat during the first half of this year, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke tells Congress this morning in testimony prepared for his semiannual report on economic conditions and monetary policy., Bernanke is speaking to the Senate Banking, Housing &amp; Urban Affairs Committee, which is webcasting the hearing here., The central bank chief goes on in his statement to say that Fed policymakers predict economic growth will likely continue at a moderate pace over coming quarters and then pick up very gradually. ... Our projections for growth in real GDP ... had a central tendency of 1.9 to 2.4 percent for this year and 2.2 to 2.8 percent for 2013. These forecasts are lower than those we made in January, reflecting the generally disappointing tone of the recent incoming data., The risks to the economy's continued growth, he adds, continue to be the euro-area fiscal and banking crisis ... [and] the U.S. fiscal situation. And, says Bernanke:, The most effective way that the Congress could help to support the economy right now would be to work to address the nation's fiscal challenges in a way that takes into account both the need for long-run sustainability and the fragility of the recovery. Doing so earlier rather than later would help reduce uncertainty and boost household and business confidence., The Wall Street Journal, which is live blogging the hearing, says that:, &mdash; Bernanke provided no new direct clues as to whether the central bank would take fresh steps to support the fragile economic recovery., &mdash; It's hardly shocking, but Bernanke's testimony changes little from his prior guidance about Fed policy. But he's especially dour., Looking for brighter news on the economy?, The National Association of Home Builders says:, Builder confidence in the market for newly built, single-family homes rose six points to 35 on the National Association of Home Builders/Wells Fargo Housing Market Index (HMI) for July, released today. This is the largest one-month gain recorded by the index in nearly a decade, and brings the HMI to its highest point since March of 2007., Update at 2:10 p.m. ET. Stocks Are Up, Led By Those That Do Well In Tough Times:, Reuters writes that stocks rose in volatile trade on Tuesday, led largely by sectors that perform well in a struggling economy, as comments from Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke underscored that growth remains weak.
Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney speaks about job numbers July 6 at Bradley's Hardware in Wolfeboro, N.H., Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney says he can do better than President Obama at finding jobs for unemployed Americans. One way he would do that is by bringing back personal re-employment accounts., When people lose their jobs, one of the first places they turn to is their state unemployment office, where they can sign up for unemployment benefits; they often can enroll in some kind of retraining class as well., &ldquo; If people are unemployed because their skills are outmoded ... then they need new skills. That can't be done on the cheap., - Ross Eisenbrey, Economic Policy Institute, In 2004, the Bush administration conducted an experiment to begin privatizing a small part of the federal retraining program., The justification was that you would better manage yourself than if people in the public sector were giving you guidance about training and re-employment services, says Stephen Wandner, a former senior economist at the Labor Department., The program worked by giving unemployed workers an account containing $3,000 to get back on their feet. They could use the money to pay for job training, or just to help them in the job search. For instance, it could pay for travel to job interviews or for printing resumes., It was entirely theirs, says John McAllister, chief deputy director of the Labor Department in Idaho. There [were] no restrictions on it whatsoever., Idaho is one of the states that participated in the program. McAllister says if people got jobs right away, they were free to take the money as a bonus and spend it how they wanted. McAllister says he thought the prospect of getting a bonus would encourage people to look for work more aggressively. Instead, he says, they mostly used the money for what are called supportive services., People used the money to pay for things that made it possible for them to hold down jobs. It went to pay for day care or new work clothes or car repairs. McAllister says people didn't really need encouragement to look for work., I think we misjudged the population we were dealing with, he says. They had difficulty even getting to a job. They had to solve that before they could get the bonus. We got the cart before the horse, is one way to put it., The program was never extended after it ended. An independent report issued a few years later concluded the program wasn't a big success. Now, Romney has talked about reviving the program if he's elected, though he hasn't provided many details about what he would do differently., The Romney campaign didn't respond to requests for comment., Ross Eisenbrey of the Economic Policy Institute says if personal re-employment accounts are to work, the government has to be realistic about the cost. He says $3,000 simply isn't enough to retrain most laid-off workers., If people are unemployed because their skills are outmoded and they're not going to find the kind of skills they've done in the past, then they need new skills, Eisenbrey says. That can't be done on the cheap., Wandner, who is now with the Urban Institute, agrees. He says it's hard to get many unemployed people interested in job retraining programs. He says most unemployed people simply want to find work as soon as possible, and it's probably more cost-effective for the government to assist them by pointing out existing job openings or teaching them how to write a resume., If you give an individual job search assistance and he goes back to work, you pay out less unemployment insurance, Wandner says. And the government receives more taxes such that job search assistance actually pays for itself., Even with government help, finding work may not be easy, especially at a time like this. Many people will have to reinvent themselves, and the challenge is finding a way to help them do that and get them back to work as soon as possible.
Some young adults say their student loan debt affects their dating and marriage potential. A few have had partners break up with them over debt, while other couples forge ahead, but keep finances separate and avoid legal marriage., Some young adults say their student loan debt affects their dating and marriage potential. A few have had partners break up with them over debt, while other couples forge ahead, but keep finances separate and avoid legal marriage., The increasing debt load of college graduates has affected young people's lives in untold ways, from career choices to living arrangements. Now add another impact on a key part of young adult life: dating and marriage., Rachel Bingham, an art teacher in Portland, Maine, learned this a few years back, when a guy broke it off after four months of a budding relationship. Among other reasons, he cited her $80,000 in student loan debt., He said it scared him, she recalls, that it really made him anxious. And he just did not want to take on my responsibility., That made Bingham angry because she had never asked for his help. She says she has been very responsible, diligently making her loan payments., I was really floored at the time, because I just didn't consider that as a reason for someone to not be with someone else, she says. I felt it was very shallow., Bingham is now engaged to a man who's not scared off by her debt, but it turns out her ex-boyfriend was far from alone. The issue recently came up in a letter to an advice column at Nerve.com, a pop culture dating website. This time it was a woman wary of a serious relationship because her boyfriend has $150,000 in debt, mostly student loans., He was explaining his money stress to me, the woman wrote, and I started crying because I saw the future I want falling away., She wrote that she felt embarrassed about being so selfish, and signed her letter, Am I Being Awful?, Caitlin Caven, who writes the site's Miss Information column, assured the woman that she's right to take a hard look at things. She suggested that a responsible approach to repayment is more important than the boyfriend's actual admittedly staggering amount of debt. Caven says readers also weighed in., There were a lot of people saying, 'Dump him, get out,' she says. And then there was a lot of backlash, saying, 'Hey, that's unfair. You guys are clearly not thinking about how student debt works in this country. So many people are in debt like that, that you can't just get rid of a good relationship because of it.' , &ldquo; Generally, it starts with an awkward look, like, 'What have I gotten myself into?', - Craig Pfeister, describing how dates react when he tells them how much student loan debt he has, Caven advised the woman to keep her finances separate and consider a prenuptial agreement., 'An Impediment To Moving Forward', When NPR asked about this issue on its Facebook page, many couples said they've avoided legal marriage so one partner wouldn't be liable for the other one's debt. In fact, responsibility for student loans does not transfer to a spouse. But, practically speaking?, Well, once you're married, you're basically responsible for it at some level, says Bill Driscoll, a financial planner in Massachusetts. He sees the impact of student loan debt on his 30-something clients., It's causing uncertainty and tension, he says, because it's an impediment to them moving forward on a lot of fronts., Those include having a child or saving for college, saving for retirement and the biggie: buying a house., If they go to buy a home, says Driscoll, and they've got $65,000 in student debt, that's going to undermine a lot of the possibilities for getting financing., Driscoll says half of his clients don't see eye to eye when it comes to spending versus saving, so he advises hashing out a compromise plan. Mostly, he counsels couples to talk about financial problems early. But that can be hard to do., Feeling A Stigma, I just usually wait until it comes up and kind of clench my teeth, says Craig Pfeister, a 29-year-old craftsman who makes guitars in Denver. He has north of $100,000 in student loans, and has grown used to the reaction that gets from dates., Generally, it starts with an awkward look, like, 'What have I gotten myself into?' he says. Pfeister has come to realize that he's more comfortable dating women who also have lots of student debt., We can kind of laugh about it, he says, like we're both owned by Sallie Mae. If they already have in their mind they'll have this debt for their entire life, when they hear about mine, it's just, 'Oh, you, too?' , And if Pfeister ends up marrying more debt? Sure, it would add to his financial stress. But, he says, at least the stigma would not be just on him.
Stephen Covey speaks to students at the National Auditorium in Mexico City in September 2008. Covey's The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People has sold more than 25 million copies worldwide. Covey died Monday. He was 79., Stephen Covey speaks to students at the National Auditorium in Mexico City in September 2008. Covey's The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People has sold more than 25 million copies worldwide. Covey died Monday. He was 79., Stephen Covey, the management and self-help guru who wrote The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, has died. He was 79., Covey's family said the writer and motivational speaker died at a hospital in Idaho Falls, Idaho, early Monday from complications caused by a bicycle accident in April., Covey's 7 Habits, which was first published in 1989, was on The New York Times best-seller list for more than five years. According to his longtime publicist, Covey had examined the past two centuries of literature surrounding success and turned those ideas into catchy notions, ultimately a mega-hit and a publishing and consulting empire., Covey was a motivational speaker known for boiling down life practices that lead to action in a way that made it easy for people to understand., Covey was a motivational speaker known for boiling down life practices that lead to action in a way that made it easy for people to understand., As a young man, Covey had planned to go into the family business, but as he told a convocation of students at Montana State University in 2008, his plans changed. The leader of a volunteer organization he'd been working with asked him to train other leaders., At first he demurred as he felt it was outside his comfort zone., But he said to me, 'I see you have the ability to do this. I will help you. You don't have to be a great font of wisdom. You just bring people together to get them to share best practices, and to learn to collaborate, and to become creative with each other.', He helped me and I found my voice., Covey's book begins by urging people to move from dependence to independence or self-mastery., The habits: be proactive, take initiative and accept the consequences; begin with the end in mind; put first things first; think win-win; seek first to understand, then to be understood; synergize; and sharpen the saw, or a focus on self-rejuvenation., His impact has been enormous and has spanned not just the business world but how to live your life, says Jennifer Chatman, a management expert at the University of California, Berkeley. His brilliance was in boiling down some life practices that lead to action in a way that people could get their arms around and digest., None of it, Chatman says, was complex or very sophisticated. Many Fortune 100 companies embraced his methods; Covey became a management consultant to a lot of them. Some still rely on Covey's seven basic principles., Covey's ideas have also been embraced by more than 800 schools worldwide. The first was A.B. Combs Elementary School in Raleigh, N.C. Following the Columbine shootings, the school was looking for a way to improve its environment and performance., Our children are making better decisions [and] we're seeing a huge decline in discipline [problems], says Muriel Summers, the school's principal., Summers says the school also saw an increase in test scores and more engaged families, since it also taught Covey's 7 Habits to the students' parents., It's pretty amazing what is happening, she says., Her words would most likely be music to Covey's ears. He loved inspiring and working with young children and had more than 50 grandchildren of his own. His publicist said Monday that she thinks Covey would most want to be remembered for being a good family man.
1 of 9, Take a hot dog from New York's famed Coney Island, throw in plenty of Greek immigrants and a booming auto industry, add some chili sauce, a steamed bun, chopped onions, mustard and an epic sibling rivalry and you've got the makings of a classic American melting pot story., That story is told in Coney Detroit, a new book that serves as paean for what's become the quintessential dish of the Motor City. Coneys a name that designates not just the dogs but the diners that serve them up dominate the Detroit landscape. Where many other cities offer the chance to navigate by national chain (turn right at the third Starbucks), in Detroit, directions come in Coneys., I'm comfortable saying there are about 500 Coneys at any given time, in the Detroit region, says Coney Detroit co-author Joe Grimm, who has done some serious investigative digesting on the project including visiting 100 Coneys in 100 days. (Proceeds from the book will go to Detroit's Gleaners' Food Bank.), The history of Detroit Coneys harks back to the early 20th century, when thousands of Greek immigrants were streaming into the city's burgeoning Greektown. But first, they had to stop at New York's Ellis Island not too far from the famed amusements of Coney Island, where Nathan Handwerker was already peddling his famous hot dogs., Patrons pack in at American Coney in this undated photo. 1942, Patrons pack in at American Coney in this undated photo. 1942, No one knows for sure who brought the Coney to Detroit, Grimm says, but everyone knows who made it famous: William Bill and Constantine Gust Keros. Nine decades ago (the exact date is in dispute), the two Greek brothers opened their hot dog joint, American Coney Island, in the heart of downtown Detroit at the intersection of Michigan Avenue and Lafayette Boulevard, where it still sits today., Their timing was perfect: In the 1920s, Detroit was a boomtown busting at the seams, Grimm says, with workers lured by the solid salaries at the auto factories. (Ford was paying a whopping 5 bucks a day!) So many workers were crammed into the city, there wasn't enough lodging to go around people rented rooms in 8-hour shifts. In this bustling environment, a quick grab-and-go lunch was essential. And for newly arrived Greek immigrants, hot dogs were a relatively cheap business to break into., They were trying to serve American factory workers trying to come in off a crowded street, Grimm says. And the best way to turn money in the restaurant business is to turn tables over fast., The business was going gangbusters, but eventually Bill and Gust butted heads, and in 1936, Bill decided to open up his own shop, Lafayette Coney right next door. Thus was born one of Detroit's most storied rivalries, with each Coney drawing fiercely partisan fans. Even today, Grimm says, there are some Lafayette or American loyalists who are beyond middle age who will tell you they've never stepped into to the other shop., Detroit began its long, slow decline mid-century, but the Coneys survived thanks to a new generation of Greek immigrants who followed the exodus to the suburbs, setting up dozens of Coneys, including several chains. (One of the most successful chains, Kerby's Koney Island, is run by the extended Keros family.), Other Michigan cities have also embraced Coneys in Flint, for example, the hot dogs come topped with a loose meat topping. But it is Detroit, one might argue, where Coneys have reached their apotheosis., Today transplanted Detroiters can order kits to make their own Coneys at home. (My neighbor in the D.C. suburbs, a Michigan native, likes to keep frozen chili from the National Coney Island chain on hand at all times.), Coneys even provide a major plot line in Jeffrey Eugenides' Pulitzer Prize-winning epic Middlesex (one character of Greek descent finds fortune after founding the Hercules Hot Dogs chain)., Coneys, it would seem, have become an essential ingredient in Detroit's identity. People who think it's just a messy hot dog, Grimm says, are kind of missing the point.
With all the talk about what to do with the Bush tax cuts and whether they should be extended for no one, everyone, or everyone under a certain income cutoff we thought it made sense to check in on how much Americans actually make., Roughly $50,000. That's how much the median households makes in income and benefits per year. In other words, half of American households made less than $50,000 and half made more., A household, as the Census defines it, consists of all the people who occupy one house or apartment. That means anyone living under the same roof and includes families, but also roommates sharing an apartment or people living on their own. The Census counted 114.6 million households in 2010, the most recent year for which it has published data., The Census Bureau has some useful data on that subject. Here's a breakdown of how many households made different amounts in 2010:, Source: Census Bureau, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, Some takeaways: Almost one household out of every four (24.9 percent) makes less than $25,000 a year. About one in three households (30.1 percent) made between $50,000 and $100,000. One in five households (19.9 percent) made more than $100,000 a year., The income part of the data excludes dividends, capital gains and income from real estate, like rent payments. The benefits part includes food stamps or subsidized housing. Many of these government subsidies are targeted at poorer households., Government transfers account for a much larger fraction of the total income for those on the bottom of the income distribution, said economics professor James X. Sullivan of Notre Dame University. For some, like the elderly on the lower end of the income distribution, government-provided social security can be their sole source of income., Here are a map and a sortable table showing how your state compares to others:, Source: Census Bureau, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo/NPR
Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art in New York City., Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art in New York City., Our show on Friday told the cautionary tale of the Red Cross, and how it earned the lasting suspicion of World War II veterans when it temporarily charged for once-free doughnuts., Uri Simonsohn, a University of Pennsylvania business professor, chalked it up to categorical change and the sense of betrayal veterans felt when they saw a fundamental shift in the very nature of their relationship with the Red Cross., Listener Barry Drogin left a comment observing that a storied New York college risks doing itself similar harm as it considers charging some students after offering free tuition for more than a century., Founded by industrialist Peter Cooper 153 years ago, the Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art focuses on art, architecture and engineering, and has a small student body: about a thousand undergraduates and maybe a hundred graduate students in any given year., Each has gotten a full scholarship since 1902. Now, however, the school is struggling with budget deficits. In April, its president, Jamshed Bharucha, announced a plan that included charging new graduate students next year, and leaves open the possibility of charging new undergraduates beginning after 2013. The very idea sparked debate last fall, and again this spring, as the New York Times has reported., In his comment, Drogan said he worries the move will hurt the loyalty of Cooper Union's existing students and alumni. For them, he writes,, the idea that only those with financial need deserve the scholarship is a category change that will destroy the relationship of many former alumni to the college - Cooper would be changed into just another 'honors college' that is hard to get into. Many faculty alumni will leave., The school which also was a pioneer in admitting women and minorities, and boasts wide range of illustrious alumni and its alumni, faculty and students continue to look for other ways to tackle its financial challenges.
Mark Zuckerberg, right, and Andrew Houston, founder and chief executive of Dropbox, wait in a parked car for the traffic to clear out at the Sun Valley Lodge during the Allen &amp; Company Sun Valley Conference last week., Mark Zuckerberg, right, and Andrew Houston, founder and chief executive of Dropbox, wait in a parked car for the traffic to clear out at the Sun Valley Lodge during the Allen &amp; Company Sun Valley Conference last week., Last Thursday, the interest rate on 30-year mortgages dipped to its lowest level ever: 3.56 percent., But if you were a billionaire with flexibility you could probably be paying a lot less. Case in point, reports Bloomberg, Mark Zuckerberg, the billionaire CEO and founder of Facebook, just refinanced his $5.95 million mortgage with a 30-year adjustable-rate loan that begins with a 1.05 percent interest rate., The reason for that incredible rate is that it can change month to month and Zuckerberg, with a $15.7 billion net worth, can afford to take that risk., So why would Zuckerberg even need a mortgage? Here's Bloomberg:, While almost all lending rates have reached historical lows this year, the borrowing costs available to high-net-worth individuals are even lower if the person is willing to bear the risk of monthly interest rate adjustments, said Greg McBride, senior financial analyst with Bankrate Inc., a North Palm Beach, Florida-based firm that tracks interest rates. Large increases are unlikely anytime soon with the Federal Reservesignaling it will keep interest rates near zero for at least two years., 'When you can borrow at a rate below inflation, you're borrowing for free,' McBride said in an e-mail. 'This is the concept of using other people's money and it preserves financial flexibility for the borrower.'
Helping or hurting the economy?, Helping or hurting the economy?, We all know an out-of-control financial sector can cause acute and long-lasting problems, thanks to the recent financial crisis. But is there also a more chronic drag on the economy when the finance crowd gets too thick?, One recent paper (PDF) suggests so, and tries to quantify just how much a bloated financial sector can hurt economic growth., The authors aren't your typical iconoclasts: Stephen G Cecchetti and Enisse Kharroubi work for the Bank for International Settlements, which serves as a kind of working group for central banks around the world., The paper's conclusion is, in effect, that a well developed financial sector is good for growth but that too much of a good thing isn't so good in the end, and hurts some industries more than others., To quote the paper's introduction:, ... at low levels, a larger financial system goes hand in hand with higher productivity growth. But there comes a point one that many advanced economies passed long ago where more banking and more credit lower growth., The authors go on to conclude that rapid growth in the financial sector slows real growth. In other words: All else equal, a boom-and-bust financial sector grows more slowly over the long term than the slow-and steady variety., And what part of the economy suffers the most? Industries that depend heavily on research and development the very high-tech industries on which many cities, states and countries are pinning their hopes., This happens because the financial industry can lure the best and brightest from elsewhere, the authors write., It requires not only physical capital, in the form of buildings, computers and the like, but highly skilled workers as well. Finance literally bids rocket scientists away from the satellite industry. The result is that erstwhile scientists, people who in another age dreamt of curing cancer or flying to Mars, today dream of becoming hedge fund managers., Of course, even in a high-finance society, plenty of people continue to dream of (and work toward) curing cancer and flying to Mars. But if, at the margins, smart and capable people go into finance instead, it can make a difference., Isn't all economic growth more or less the same? Not necessarily. Finance is like trucking: Both facilitate other business. Having too-small a trucking sector is bad, because goods don't get to market. But a sprawling and inefficient trucking industry could be bad as well, driving up the cost of getting goods to market and absorbing time, energy and resources that customers could otherwise put into innovation., The authors pinpoint some fairly straightforward benchmarks: Overall, when private credit grows to the point where it exceeds GDP, it becomes a drag on productivity growth. And they estimate that a boom in the financial sector lowers economic growth per worker by an estimated 0.5 percent, when compared to a country with stable employment in the financial sector., In countries where the financial sector is growing rapidly relative to the rest of the economy, the authors say R&amp;D-intensive; industries could see productivity growth something like 2 percentage points per year less than an industry less dependent on R&D; and in a country with a slower-growing financial sector., We aren't the first to notice this study. It came to our attention by way of Dean Baker, a progressive economist and co-director of the Center for Economic and Policy Research. In a blog post he wrote late last month, he generally praised the paper, but raised some potential criticisms as well. For example, he noted that the study's results could be skewed slightly by ending in 2008, when productivity growth ... largely reflects how quickly firms could dump workers in response to the downturn., The Alphaville blog, over at the Financial Times, also spotted the study, and found the faintest of silver linings:, The next time you are feeling glum about impact of the global financial crisis, perhaps think of this... maybe the scientists who flocked to banks and hedge funds will start doing research again. Maybe we have more breakthroughs to look forward to as a result of the retrenchment of resources.
The bad news: Retail sales fell 0.5 percent in June from May, the Census Bureau says. It's the third straight month that sales have been down from the month before., But, Census adds that June sales were 3.8 percent above the pace of June 2011. And, sales for the April through June 2012 period were up 4.7 percent ... from the same period a year ago., Bloomberg News says the June drop is a sign limited employment gains are taking a toll on the biggest part of the economy. The consensus among economists before the report's release was that sales most likely went up about 0.2 percent last month., Dow Jones Newswires calls the report the latest sign of a slowing economy.
Will American emerge from bankruptcy as a stand-alone airline, or will it merge with US Airways? An American spokesman says it's considering all options., Will American emerge from bankruptcy as a stand-alone airline, or will it merge with US Airways? An American spokesman says it's considering all options., Imagine going into bankruptcy with billions of dollars in cash still in your bank account. That's what American Airlines did last November. The thinking was that management would gut the company's pensions and union contracts and emerge from bankruptcy ready to compete., But then US Airways said it could take over American and be profitable, and it wouldn't have to hurt American's employees nearly as bad in the process. American's pilots, mechanics and flight attendants loved that idea., James Little is the president of the Transport Workers International Union of America. His 26,000 members who work at American are still going to be giving back in these newly renegotiated contracts. But it's going to be better than American first proposed., In one group, the fleet service alone, which is a little over 12,000 members, we were saving about 4,000 jobs. In fact, we were keeping about another 27 cities open that American had chosen to close, Little says., While American Airlines could very well emerge from bankruptcy a healthier stand-alone airline, there are quite a few analysts who believe that if it really wants to compete successfully with United and Delta, American needs to merge., American spokesman Bruce Hicks says it's looking at all options. American Airlines is committed to the best outcome, whatever that outcome might be, for all stakeholders involved, and particularly our employees, all employees at every level management, nonmanagement, union, nonunion alike, Hicks says., The New York Times reported that American's management team stands to make between $300 million and $600 million in bonuses if American Airlines emerges from bankruptcy as a stand-alone company, and that only after the giant payday has been pocketed will the inevitable merger with US Airways be allowed to go through., That's not the case, says Hicks. Trust me: There's nothing motivating the management of American Airlines except the success of American Airlines, he says.
Agriculture is a key job sector in Yuma, Ariz., where the seasonal workforce and migrant labor tend to boost the unemployment rate., Maria Arvizu continues to fill out job applications even though she has yet to deposit her last paycheck., Arvizu, 53, relocated to Yuma, Ariz., to become a bus driver for the local school district last year. After school closed for summer break, she was caught off guard when she was laid off. She had expected to get another driving assignment and was denied collecting unemployment because she was still considered a school employee. , I just keep looking for a job, Arvizu says., Yuma a town of about 93,000 along the Mexican border has the country's highest jobless rate, at 28.9 percent more than three times the national rate of 8.2 percent. Meanwhile, Bismarck, N.D., has the lowest rate in the U.S., at just 2.5 percent. The disparity shows how local economies differ, and how that diversity affects their jobless rates., So why is Yuma's rate so high?, The unemployment rate of border communities can sometimes artificially increase and even double because of a large uncounted migrant population, says San Diego State University economics professor James Gerber. And border cities tend to have greater health problems and lower levels of education, which are associated with high unemployment, he says., A Testing Ground For Future Jobs, Yuma's market is heavily influenced by its agriculture sector, which is mostly based on seasonal employment. When growing seasons end for citrus and winter vegetables, workers migrate from Yuma to work on other crops in the region, says Patrick Goetz, business service officer for the Yuma Private Industry Council., In May, Yuma, Ariz., recorded the highest unemployment rate in the country, while Bismarck, N.D., had the lowest., Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Kevin Uhrmacher/NPR, The nonprofit helps employers find ways to keep workers on the payroll through reduced hours or job sharing, for example. Layoffs are the last resort, Goetz says., Agriculture season is coming to a close, he says. Traditionally this time of year we bump up notches on the unemployment scale. In the fall, hospitality and retail [jobs] climb back up as visitors come., But there are signs that job opportunities are rising in Yuma. Listings on the Yuma Private Industry Council jobs board have increased since last year. In May, 44 employers posted 92 jobs up from the same month last year when eight employers listed 33 positions, Goetz says. , Amid declines in the construction and retail industries, Yuma is becoming a laboratory for military defense training and renewable energy., We're leading in Department of Defense testing and now solar, says Julie Engel, president of the Greater Yuma Economic Development Corporation, a public/private partnership., Arizona Western College in Yuma is a test site for companies developing solar-powered technologies. It houses a 5-megawatt solar installation, enough to power about 600 homes a year. Another project that's nearly complete has created about 800 jobs in Yuma and will put 240 megawatts of power on the grid., Engel says she hopes the projects will draw more manufacturing to the area., Low Unemployment Has Downsides, Bismarck, the capital of North Dakota, is at the other end of the U.S. employment spectrum. As of April, the latest month for which data was available, there were 3,300 more jobs in the Bismarck area than a year earlier., The state's energy boom has helped keep the city's jobless rate the lowest in the country, at 2.5 percent, but it has also kept officials busy struggling to build new schools. A dramatic influx of workers has also created a housing shortage., Throughout central and western North Dakota, the core sector that reels in jobs is energy, says Kelvin Hullet, president of the Bismarck-Mandan Chamber of Commerce. Traditionally, coal excavation supplied more than 25,000 jobs, but new recoverable oil developments in the Bakken formation have boosted job openings., With advances in oil drilling methods, 3 billion to 4 billion barrels of oil may be recoverable in the Bakken formation, according to a 2008 estimate by the U.S. Geological Survey. That's 25 times as much oil as the agency estimated in 1995., Hullet says it has taken more than a decade to diversify the local economy, which also includes health care, agriculture, manufacturing and technical services., Rapid business developments in Bismarck, which had a population of 61,000 in 2010, have led to a flood of newcomers, causing a scarcity in housing and crowding schools. Hullet says affordable homes have been in high demand since the housing market started to constrict in January., Construction workers ease a steel girder into place as part of a remodeling and expansion of the North Dakota State Penitentiary in Bismarck, N.D. An energy boom has helped the state maintain a budget surplus., Construction workers ease a steel girder into place as part of a remodeling and expansion of the North Dakota State Penitentiary in Bismarck, N.D. An energy boom has helped the state maintain a budget surplus., And more houses will crop up this year. Through May, 407 permits for single-family homes had been issued more than double the number issued for the same period a year earlier. By this summer, about 700 lots will be ready to go under construction and have homes built on them, he says., Our homebuilders and housing folks are building as fast as they can, Hullet says. And the question is, can we build the houses fast enough?, Bismarck's employment boom has strained social services. Hopeful job seekers simply pack their cars and drive to North Dakota, including one man Hullet met earlier., Literally, he was on his last tank of gas looking to find a job, Hullet says. We've seen a lot of that. People come, basically living in their cars until they can find a job and get on their feet., And with the influx of people, Bismarck is responding to growing class sizes to accommodate about 250 new students each year. Proposals to build two elementary schools for more than 800 students and one high school for about 1,300 students are up to a vote in September, says Tamara Uselman, the superintendent of Bismarck Public Schools., Officials are maximizing all available space and have even leased room from a church to conduct classes. As part of a new strategy next year, a local elementary school will have two teachers in the same classroom., Every bit of space that we have, we use, says Uselman. We have trouble finding a room for special services, like a timeout room., The neighboring city of Mandan has faced similar growing pains. More than 280 children entered kindergarten this past school year, and the city projects a similar number in the fall., We're growing. It wasn't too long ago in North Dakota where there was a declining population, says Mike Bitz, the superintendent of Mandan Public Schools. It's nicer to be growing than to be dying.
Equipment for transporting and housing coal sits idle in Cowen, W.Va. Since the natural gas boom, several mines in Webster County have either slowed or shut down operation, laying off hundreds of workers., Equipment for transporting and housing coal sits idle in Cowen, W.Va. Since the natural gas boom, several mines in Webster County have either slowed or shut down operation, laying off hundreds of workers., At some point today, you will probably flip on a light switch. That simple action connects you to the oldest and most plentiful source of American electricity: coal., Since the early 1880s when Edison and Tesla pioneered the distribution of electrical power into our homes most of that power has come from the process of burning coal., Four years ago, something started to change. First it was slow, and then this past month that change became dramatic. Coal now generates just 34 percent of our electricity, down from about 50 percent just four years ago., Now, the loss of coal as the dominant energy source is having damaging effects on the towns that once relied on the black rock for their livelihood., The Towns That Coal Built, In front of the historic courthouse in Webster Springs, W.Va., in Webster County, a huge slab of shiny, black coal sits as a symbol of what helped build the county of about 9,000 people., Last month, Arch Coal, the operator of one of the biggest mines in the county, announced a round of devastating layoffs more than 1,300 employees in West Virginia and Kentucky alone. Between the other big players in central Appalachia Consol, Patriot, Alpha thousands more jobs have been lost. This past week, Patriot Coal filed for bankruptcy protection., I've never seen anything as quick as this to devastate the market, and this many layoffs at one time, says Thomas Clark, publisher of The Echo newspaper and a mine inspector for the past four decades. It's been a landslide., Rich Lewis worked as a miner for almost two decades before being laid off by Arch Coal. He says he's considering taking a job at another mine, but it's not certain that mine will stay open., Rich Lewis worked as a miner for almost two decades before being laid off by Arch Coal. He says he's considering taking a job at another mine, but it's not certain that mine will stay open., A few miles from Webster Springs, outside the town of Cowen, W.Va., a massive steel hopper stands silent like an abandoned roller coaster. Just a few weeks ago, it was humming with the sound of thousands of tons of black coal coming down the mountaintop mine along a giant conveyer belt and into a silo the size of a 15-story building., For 19 years, Rich Lewis worked as a miner on this mountain and for most of those years he was able to work as much as he needed, including weekends and overtime., For 17 years it was work all you [want to] work, Lewis says. We [were] shipping anywhere from 30 to 35 trains a month ... in the last year and a half it went down to 20 trains a month., Today, there are no trains to collect the coal, and they won't be coming back here ever., When Arch Coal gathered all 170 employees to make the grave announcement, Lewis' superintendant told them they were selling the coal at $56 a ton, but it was costing $70 a ton to operate with all of the equipment they used. Everyone, including Lewis, would be laid off., Of the three mines in Webster County, just one is still operating today., Todd Bragg, a friend of Lewis' and fellow miner, had been mining since he was 19. Before he was laid off by Arch Coal a few weeks ago, the 37-year-old had been making more than twice the median income of $25,000 in Webster County., [It] helped me survive, paid for my family ... everything, Bragg says. It's a shock to everybody. What are we going to do?, Still, Bragg and Lewis are grateful. Arch Coal gave them two months' severance and will cover their health insurance until Thanksgiving., What's Killing Coal?, For many people in Webster County, the general consensus is that the Environmental Protection Agency and tough new regulations are the main culprits behind what's hurting the coal industry., Back in March, the EPA announced standards that require all new coal-fired electricity plants to cut carbon emissions by half. It's an expensive proposition, and it's leading many power companies to back away from coal., But to get to the heart of what's really killing coal, you have to travel south from Webster County about 500 miles, to Atlanta., At one of Georgia Power Co.'s newest plants in metro Atlanta, two gas turbines and one steam turbine generate about 840 megawatts, enough energy to supply about 25,000 homes, says plant manager Tony Tramonte., It is part of our commitment to our customers to provide reliable, low-cost energy, he says., Railroad tracks once led to the facility and, every two days, a 100-car train would pull up filled with coal. Tramonte says they once consumed 5,000 tons of coal a day, but no longer. Those tracks are now dismantled and the old coal turbines are gone., Georgia Power, like a growing number of power companies, is ditching coal and switching to natural gas. Tramonte explains that one reason is the overall dramatic air quality improvement., There's a 100 percent reduction in mercury emissions ... [and] a 50 percent reduction in the rate of carbon dioxide production, he says., He also says there's a 99 percent reduction in sulfur dioxide and about a 90 percent reduction in nitrous oxide, with a plant that's now five times larger than the one it replaced., The bigger reason for the switch, however, is more mundane: money., Domestic natural gas is killing coal because it's cheap and abundant. Four years ago, electricity generated by gas was twice as expensive as coal. Today, gas is less than half the price of coal., What that means is, literally, natural gas is going to kill more coal-fired power plants than the EPA regulations, says Michael Zenker, a coal analyst for Barclays., In 2012, Zenker says, a perfect storm of sorts took place that sent coal down a deep spiral: an unseasonably warm winter, a significant reduction in electricity demand and, most importantly, hydraulic fracturing or fracking., Fracking is the controversial process by which gas can be extracted by drilling deep into rock formations. A decade ago, not a single drop of American gas was produced this way; today one-third of all our gas is now the product of fracking., An Impending Death, Last month, for the first time in U.S. history, natural gas generated as much electricity as coal., We could see coal down at 15 or 20 percent of electric supply over the next decade, says David Victor, a fossil fuel expert at the University of California, San Diego. That would be a huge change in an industry that historically has relied on coal for 50 percent or more of the electric supply., There have been times when coal's demise has been prematurely predicted, most notably in the 1980s. But the U.S. is still a coal powerhouse, often called the Saudi Arabia of coal. This time, though, says Victor, is different., We were talking about the death of coal in the '80s, but coal was half of the electric power supply, it didn't change very much, he says. Now we're talking about ... terminal illness for coal in the advanced industrialized countries, and it is actually happening., For places like Webster County, the consequences are real. Todd Bragg and Rich Lewis are considering taking jobs at a mine in Grafton, W.Va., about 100 miles away. The owners of that mine say it'll produce coal for the next 30 years. But with higher costs and declining revenue, that promise is questionable. For Bragg, it could be the difference between unemployment and a few more years of security., That'll be close to retirement age, if it lasts, he says. With gas the way it is now, you don't know what's going to happen.
Mitt Romney appears on ABC News in one of the five TV interviews he did Friday. He mostly responded to comments from the Obama campaign about his role at Bain Capital., Mitt Romney appears on ABC News in one of the five TV interviews he did Friday. He mostly responded to comments from the Obama campaign about his role at Bain Capital., Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney sat for a hastily arranged flurry of TV interviews Friday, strongly denying he had any role in running Bain Capital at a time when, according to reports, the company invested in firms that outsourced jobs overseas., He also called for an apology from President Obama for statements by his campaign that Romney said were beneath the dignity of the presidency., The five network interviews came after stories this week about Romney's role in Bain Capital. According to documents filed with the government, Romney was still CEO, president and sole owner of Bain as late as 2002. Yet Romney insists when he left Bain to organize the Salt Lake City Olympics in February 1999, that was the end of his involvement with the company., Well, I was the owner of an entity that is filing that information, but I had no role whatsoever in the management of Bain Capital after February of 1999, he told CNN. Not that that would have been a problem to have said that I was with the firm beyond that, but I simply wasn't., A Campaign Fixture, Romney's role as CEO of Bain has become a central issue in the presidential contest. Romney has touted his leadership there as a job creator and says it gave him experience to lead the nation out of its economic doldrums., But the Obama campaign has pointed to stories that say Bain invested in firms that outsourced U.S. jobs overseas and led other companies into bankruptcy. It's become a staple of the president's speeches and campaign ads. The president raised the issue in his own TV interview Friday with local Washington, D.C., station WJLA., Now, my understanding is that Mr. Romney attested to the SEC multiple times that he was the chairman, CEO and president of Bain Capital, Obama said, and I think most Americans figure if you are the chairman, CEO and president of a company, that you are responsible for what that company does., Romney's Rebuttal, The Romney campaign clearly felt it needed to address the issue. Not only did Romney sit for the TV interviews something he rarely does earlier in the week, but the campaign also launched a blistering ad of its own, using a clip of Hillary Clinton from the 2008 Democratic nomination battle. In the clip, Clinton refutes alleged untruths about her by the Obama campaign, saying, Shame on you, Barack Obama., Romney said Friday the Obama campaign was trying to shift attention away from what Romney said was the president's failure to do the job he was elected to do, which was to get this economy turned around., He also condemned the Obama campaign's assertion that Romney would be guilty of a felony for misrepresenting his position at Bain to the SEC., It's ridiculous, and of course, it's beneath the dignity of the presidency and of his campaign, Romney said. He really needs to rein in his team and finally take responsibility for what they're saying. This is really absurd., More Tax Returns?, While Romney refused to back away from his earlier statements about his role at Bain, he also refused to bend when asked if he would release more of his income tax returns., People always want to get more, and, you know, we're putting out what is required, plus more that is not required, he said. And those are the two years that people are going to have ... that's all that's necessary for people to understand something about my finances., There is no legal requirement that presidential candidates release their taxes. Democrats say Romney should look to his father's example: When he ran for president, George Romney released 12 years worth of income tax returns. And as the Friday afternoon fight over Bain suggests, it's an issue that isn't likely to go away anytime soon.
Navy veteran Howard Dunn and Army veteran Tom Kaine remember when the Red Cross briefly charged servicemen for doughnuts during World War II. Many veterans still resent it., Navy veteran Howard Dunn and Army veteran Tom Kaine remember when the Red Cross briefly charged servicemen for doughnuts during World War II. Many veterans still resent it., If you think about every other price in the world a dollar, $12.99 free stands out., Free has the power to make us do completely irrational things. It can drive us to break rules, and take risks we never thought possible. It can make us feel savvy and smug and exhilarated., Take Benjamin Joffe-Walt, brother of our own Chana Joffe-Walt. In 1995, he was 15 years old when British Airlines started offering international flights from his hometown of Philadelphia. The airline gave away free tickets to the first 100 people who showed up at 11 a.m. on a Tuesday., I remember the problem was the car, Ben recalls. I needed someone with a car to take me from the school, 45 minutes to the airport, to get the ticket and come back within two hours or so. And not get in trouble., He asked his school's assistant principal for a ride. When Ben tells this story, even now, he talks about it like a completely logical move. There he was, not making a completely inappropriate request to an authority figure, but sharing an amazing opportunity., This is completely consistent with Ben's personality. He buys the extra-large soda at the movies, not because he likes soda but because there are free refills. He buys a ticket to one movie and will stay in the theater to see two more, even if the movies are terrible. He loves getting stuff for free., The assistant principal said yes., Oh, yeah, he thought it was great, Ben says. I mean he got a free ticket. He liked golf. He went to Scotland., Everybody likes free. But free can be dangerous, too. Today's show is sort of the flip side of Ben's airline deal. It is what happens when you take something that was free and you give it a price, a decision many Internet companies face today. That is a highly risky move, it turns out. And the damage can be enormous., This week, free of charge, Chana Joffe-Walt and Alex Blumberg tell the story of the Red Cross and free doughnuts that suddenly weren't free any more. It happened 70 years ago, and the Red Cross is still feeling the consequences., Download the Planet Money iPhone App. Music: The Mynabird's Generals. Find us: Twitter/ Facebook/ Spotify/ Tumblr.
Mitt Romney faces new scrutiny over his time at the helm of Bain Capital, the private equity shop he ran from 1984 until well, that's exactly the question., The political fight of the moment is just when Romney stopped running Bain Capital, which specialized in buying troubled companies and turning them around., The Republican presidential candidate (and presumed party nominee) has long said he left in February 1999. But a Boston Globe report this week pointed to regulatory filings showing him as the company's chairman and chief executive into 2002., What does it mean that these documents listed him as the company's top executive? From a technical standpoint, a lot but from a practical standpoint, maybe not as much as it first seems., First, the background., For years, Romney and his campaign have said he left Bain to run the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City in 1999. But on Thursday, the Boston Globe ran a detailed article describing how Bain Capital, in regulatory filings with the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission, continued to list Romney as its chairman and chief executive for another three years. (Others had published similar, less detailed reports before, but with less impact.), Since the Globe article came out, debate has swirled. Romney's campaign maintains that Romney was not running the company, and besides was busy running the Olympics. The Obama campaign and its supporters argue that the filings show Romney remained in charge for longer than he has acknowledged, and thus is responsible for more of Bain's practices during that period., Bain is a privately held company (closely held in financial-speak, to differentiate it from private-sector but publicly traded companies), so its reporting requirements are different than, say, General Electric's. The company doesn't have to file documents with the SEC to tell the investing public who's running the company and how much they're paid, for example, or how much money the company made last quarter., Instead, the regulatory documents in question were filed by Bain Capital because it owned significant chunks of companies that were publicly traded. One filing from the summer of 2000, for example, shows that a fund ultimately controlled by Bain Capital owned almost 33 percent of juice-and-granola-bar company Odwalla Inc (now a unit of Coca-Cola)., That document includes this sentence, after detailing the relationship between the particular fund that owned the Odwalla shares and Bain Capital itself:, Mr. W. Mitt Romney is the sole shareholder, sole director, Chief Executive Officer and President of Bain Capital and thus is the controlling person of Bain Capital., Other filings make similar statements about Romney's position with Bain Capital during the years he was running the Olympics., So what does it mean that the documents in question listed Romney as chairman and CEO? On the one hand, it's pretty clear-cut: SEC disclosures are supposed to be accurate., If you knowingly make a false statement in a regulatory filing, it's a crime, says John Olson, a securities attorney at Gibson, Dunn &amp; Crutcher, and founding partner of the firm's Washington office., That said, several securities lawyers we spoke with (most of whom didn't want to comment publicly on a political topic) noted that these filings are often put together by some pretty junior employees. It's conceivable that someone copied and pasted from a previous filing and forgot to update some parts. But barring that, if someone is named as chief executive in an SEC filing, he or she should be CEO., Exactly what a CEO does, however, is a more open question. Companies, especially private ones like Bain, have considerable flexibility to define just what their various executive officers do, within the broad bounds of state incorporation laws and their own bylaws. CEOs can go on leave as well, though companies typically designate another executive to fill in on an interim basis when that happens., CEOs also don't necessarily run every element of their companies. Warren Buffett is chairman and CEO of Berkshire Hathaway, but he famously leaves its divisions largely in the hands of his lieutenants: Berkshire Hathaway bought the Burlington Northern railroad in 2009, but few would argue that Buffett operates a railroad., For Olson's part, even though he expects to vote for President Obama and generally contributes to Democrats, he sees the question of Romney's tenure at Bain as at least a little overblown., It's a bit of a leap from saying he's the CEO of the management company to saying he made the decision about laying people off, Olson says., That leaves the final question: Is the CEO responsible for the actions of different units of his company, whether or not he's making day-to-day decisions? That's more open to interpretation.
U.S. soldiers receive refreshments, including doughnuts, from an American Red Cross clubmobile in London. Soldiers today still resent a Red Cross move to charge for doughnuts., A lot of the online services you probably use are free. Gmail is free. Facebook is free. Yahoo News and NPR are free (though we certainly solicit contributions!). But increasingly, online companies are trying to figure out how to start charging, at least for some services, some of the time., But today, we have a cautionary tale about charging for things that were once free. It's the story of how one small mistake moving away from free can cause trouble that's impossible to fix., The story starts when Russ Roberts, a George Mason University economist, started hearing about how veterans don't like the Red Cross. That struck him as odd, and when he asked about it, he always got the same answer: the doughnuts., And I thought, the doughnuts? Roberts says. What could that be?, Go to any VFW hall, even today, and you'll get the same story: During World War II, the Red Cross had comfort stations for soldiers overseas, with free coffee and free doughnuts. Then, in 1942, the Red Cross started charging for the doughnuts. Soldiers have held a grudge ever since., Turns out it's true., It keeps coming up, that they were charged for coffee and doughnuts, says Susan Watson, archivist for the Red Cross., The organization started charging only because the U.S. Secretary of War asked it to. British soldiers had to pay for their snacks, and the free doughnuts for Americans were causing tensions. So the Red Cross complied, after protesting to no avail. It didn't last long for most of the last 70 years, Red Cross doughnuts have remained free but veterans haven't forgotten., Chalk it up to something called categorical change, says Uri Simonsohn, a University of Pennsylvania business professor. Price changes, people can adjust to. But this was different., Imagine, for Thanksgiving, you go to your parents' for dinner and after a nice dinner they say, 'That's going to be $10 per person,' Simonsohn says. You would be upset., The problem isn't the price $10 for a good turkey dinner might not be such a bad deal but that you're being charged in the first place. It changes the relationship. For the veterans, the Red Cross went from being a little like Mom, to being the corner store., So for all the Internet companies out there looking to charge for your service take heed. Changing categories is really difficult.
Police wait for protesters to appear at a branch of Barclays Bank in London on July 4., Police wait for protesters to appear at a branch of Barclays Bank in London on July 4., As the financial crisis began to unfold in 2007, the New York Federal Reserve learned that some banks might have intentionally underestimated the rates they expected to pay for loans from other banks., Documents the New York Fed released Friday, in response to a request from Congress, show that the banking regulator began to be concerned about the accuracy of LIBOR or the London Interbank Offered Rate late in 2007., That's when the New York Fed began to hear anecdotal reports that some banks might be low-balling the rates they expected to pay for short-term loans from other banks. Their intention was to avoid appearing weak. A weaker bank would have to pay a higher interest rate., A Very Big Deal, The manipulation is a very big deal, says Alan Blinder, a former vice chairman of the Federal Reserve, because the LIBOR is a benchmark for a huge number of contracts ranging from mundane things like adjustable-rate mortgages all the way to complicated derivatives., Those contracts are worth trillions of dollars and include bets about the direction of interest rates by investors from hedge funds to municipalities and pension funds. Manipulating the market could cheat investors out of billions of dollars. In fact, the city of Baltimore has already sued to recover alleged losses., I believe it's hugely damaging, if it's as bad as it might be, Blinder says. We don't know yet the dimensions., That's because some of the other 16 to 18 banks involved in setting the LIBOR could be implicated, too, including three U.S. banks: JPMorgan Chase, Citibank and Bank of America., Avoiding Stigma, The documents released Friday indicate that after seeing evidence of manipulation in the market, a New York Fed official called Barclays in April 2008 and questioned a bank official. The Barclays employee said, in fact, the bank was underreporting its rate to avoid stigma. The employee also said Barclays believed other banks were underreporting, too., Remember, this was in the early stages of the global financial crisis when concern was rising about the stability of banks, and none of them wanted to appear weak., A couple of months later, then-New York Fed President Timothy Geithner, now the secretary of the Treasury, wrote to the head of the Bank of England. Geithner urged British regulators to eliminate incentives for banks to misreport rates and proposed changes to make LIBOR more credible. But neither Geithner, nor other officials like Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke who knew of the situation, went public., Blinder, who's now an economics professor at Princeton, credits the Fed for uncovering the wrongdoing but says there were two ways the Fed might have handled the situation., One way is through internal reform of the market, which is the way that the Fed tried to push things; another way is to blow the whistle so that people know what's going on., Blinder says Geithner and other officials might have legitimately worried that going public might add more fuel to the financial panic. In any case, he says, it's an immense issue, and the potential for lawsuits is titanic.
A young supporter of Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney holds a sign during an election party at the Red Rock Casino in Las Vegas in February., A young supporter of Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney holds a sign during an election party at the Red Rock Casino in Las Vegas in February., For all the chatter that the winner of the 2012 presidential election will be determined by the economy, you wouldn't know it by looking at the most closely contested states., The recovery is still tepid in most parts of the country, and there's a sense of trepidation that signs of improvement might not last. Among the swing states, some are doing comparatively well while others are struggling but the political picture looks roughly the same in all., The polling picture in Nevada, for instance, which has the worst unemployment rate in the nation at 11.6 percent, isn't looking much different from New Hampshire, where unemployment is just 5 percent. (The national average is 8.2 percent.), You would think this would be a terrible state for [President] Obama, says Eric Herzik, chairman of the political science department at the University of Nevada, Reno. The economy's bad, it remains bad, and there's not a lot of optimism about a quick recovery., But Nevada is where Obama enjoys one of his largest leads among the swing states, according to polling averages compiled by RealClearPolitics. Conversely, the president isn't opening up anything like a comfortable lead over Republican rival Mitt Romney in battleground states with relatively low unemployment, such as New Hampshire and Iowa., Obama On Defense, Even if the state itself seems not so bad as some other states, there's a sense that we're electing a president, we're not electing a governor, says Dennis Goldford, a political scientist at Drake University in Des Moines, Iowa., The fact that the economy has been stuck in low gear explains why Obama is almost exclusively playing defense against Romney. The question of his re-election turns on his ability to hold onto the bulk of the states he won four years ago., Indiana and North Carolina appear already out of his reach. And voters in the main battleground states remain uncertain about whether he deserves a second term. Obama maintains a slight polling lead in those states but certainly doesn't command clear majority support, mirroring the national outlook., That's why the president is out trying to make the case that while things aren't great, they've improved on his watch and would get worse under Romney., This is the Democratic strategy, and maybe the only one to shift blame either on past administrations or Europe, says Sean Snaith, director of the University of Central Florida's Institute for Economic Competitiveness. That has to be what's going on, because certainly the current situation in the economy is not something you'd think someone could get re-elected on., Other factors are at work, such as ideological and partisan leanings, and voter reactions to such issues as health care and same-sex marriage. Still, the economy remains dominant, and the presidential race remains too close to call with four months to go before Election Day., Here are snapshots of the economic and political situations in several swing states:, Unemployment: 8.1 percent, Rate when Obama took office in January 2009: 6.6 percent, Current polling average: Obama 47.2 percent / Romney 44.2 percent, Job growth is happening faster than expected in Colorado this year, with nearly every industry now hiring, according to a recent survey by the University of Colorado. Though their optimism has been tempered, business leaders remain positive in terms of expectations about hiring, sales and profits. Colorado business leaders are more optimistic about the state economy than the national economy, says Brian Lewandowski, a research associate at the university's business school., The sour mood hasn't helped Obama's chances but hasn't sunk them, either, notes Floyd Ciruli, a Denver-based pollster. Obama's polling lead here has been small yet steady. As a targeted state, we are watching now almost nonstop ads on our local newscasts, Ciruli says. The president's ads are overwhelmingly negative and geared toward undermining Romney on the economy., Unemployment: 8.6 percent, Rate in January 2009: 8.6 percent, Current polling average: Obama 46.2 percent / Romney 45.4 percent, Florida's economy, which was hit hard both by foreclosures and declining tourism, has gotten a bit better. Business and professional services are doing well and international trade is taking off, particularly with Brazil and other parts of South America. From our view and from the data's perspective, the economy has touched bottom and is increasing, says Dale Brill, head of the research and policy arm of the Florida Chamber of Commerce., But the speed of Florida's recovery remains more tortoise than hare. As a result, consumers and people in business remain nervous, Brill says. Depending on the poll and depending on the day, either Romney or Obama can claim a lead here. Pete Dunbar, a Republican former state legislator, says, I would definitely put us in a tossup situation., Unemployment rate: 5.1 percent, Rate in January 2009: 4.8 percent, Current polling average: Obama 46.5 percent / Romney 44 percent, Iowa is lifting itself out of the recession pretty well, says University of Iowa economist John Solow. The state's major urban areas are having some success in the technology sector, while agriculture is benefiting from high crop prices. Agricultural land prices are up, and housing hasn't suffered from the same boom-and-bust cycles as the Sunbelt and other parts of the Midwest. When the price of corn is up and it's quite high by historical standards right now that means business for the farm implement dealer in town and the seed dealer. And that has had an impact, Solow says., Still, despite Iowa's relatively low unemployment rate, people are uneasy about the economy, says Dennis Goldford, of Drake University in Des Moines, Iowa. That's partly because of the unsettled national picture. The independents who pushed Democratic candidates to victory in 2006 and 2008 and swung mightily to the GOP in 2010 are still dissatisfied. Iowans tend to take the general sense that the country is on the right track or the wrong track as the guiding parameter in deciding about the presidential race, Goldford says., Unemployment: 11.6 percent, Rate in January 2009: 9.4 percent, Current polling average: Obama 49.3 percent / Romney 44 percent, Nevada's economy contains a few bright spots: Gold mining is doing well, ranching and farming are doing OK, and Las Vegas looks ready to welcome a record number of visitors this year, says Stephen Brown, director of the University of Nevada, Las Vegas Center for Business and Economic Research. But that's about it. Tourists aren't spending as much money on average as they used to. Nevada has been a foreclosure capital, and that, coupled with the slowdown in population growth, has meant a collapse in both housing and construction. As a result, the state's unemployment rate is the highest in the nation. I think it's going to be a while before we see a really strong recovery here, Brown says., Perhaps because things are so bad in the state, people in Nevada are not buying the medicine that Romney is selling, suggests Eric Herzik, of the University of Nevada, Reno. Nevada is already a low-tax, low-regulation state. Romney's call to free up the free market therefore isn't resonating as well as he might like. It's not as if Nevadans are saying Obama's economic policies are not at fault or are wonderful, but the Republican response, in a sense, has been tried in this state, and it hasn't worked, either, Herzik says., Unemployment: 5 percent, Rate in January 2009: 5.1 percent, Current polling average: Obama 48.7 percent / Romney 43 percent, Only five states have unemployment rates lower than New Hampshire's. Technology and tourism are healthy, particularly in the state's populous southern counties, near Boston and along the sea coast. Consumer confidence surveys indicate that residents see the economic picture improving in general. You would say people in New Hampshire must feel content, very good about things, says Russ Thibeault, president of Applied Economic Research in Laconia, N.H. But we don't, not at all., Among the reasons Thibeault cites for this unhappiness are continuing problems with foreclosures and home prices, as well as slow job growth and unheard of net out-migration. People in New Hampshire are used to a fast-growing economy, and they no longer have one. Instead, the duration of what still feels like a slowdown is wearing on them. Long story short, local conditions in New Hampshire are better than nationally, but I expect that national will trump local when it comes to the presidential race, says Dante Scala, a political scientist at the University of New Hampshire., Unemployment: 7.3 percent, Rate in January 2009: 8.8 percent, Current polling average: Obama 46.2 percent / Romney 43.6 percent, Four years ago, there was a palpable sense in Ohio that the economy was getting worse, and fast. There's no longer that sense, says Jason Seligman, an Ohio State University economist. Manufacturing jobs are coming back with Obama getting some credit in parts of the state that rely on the domestic auto industry. Natural gas exploration and extraction has also been a controversial but economically fruitful industry, hiring people and creating a demand for infrastructure. What you see in Ohio right now is generally a state that has done a pretty good job in this recovery, relative to the nation, Seligman says., The fact remains, however, that some areas of Ohio are struggling. Even where job creation is happening, it remains a long, slow struggle. Unemployment is coming down and companies are coming back, but small and mid-sized companies have hit a glass ceiling in terms of growth, says Chris Widener, the Republican chair of the state Senate Finance Committee. Given the tales of struggle Widener says he still hears from people in his district, he's surprised that Obama is polling as well as he is. Any person in the White House, regardless of party, he says, bears the burden of how people are doing., Unemployment: 5.6 percent, Rate in January 2009: 6 percent, Current polling average: Obama 47.5 percent / Romney 44.5 percent, Virginia's unemployment rate is low relative to other states, thanks in large part to consistent spending by the Pentagon (which is located in Virginia) and other parts of the federal government. What's left of the old textile and furniture manufacturing sectors have held on, while much of the economy has diversified into professional and business services. Housing prices, meanwhile, are rising at a rate of about 3 percent over last year, compared with just over 1 percent nationwide., Still, job creation is not happening as fast as in the rest of the nation. And 5 percent unemployment still sounds like a lot in a state that had 3 percent before the recession, says Ann Macheras, who leads the regional economic research division at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. Employers are nervous about the effects from potential cuts to defense and other government spending, and have grown accustomed to watching the economy start to slow down again every time it appears to be picking up steam. But the fact that unemployment in Virginia is so much lower than the national rate is a not-so-hidden advantage for Obama, says Larry Sabato, director of the University of Virginia's Center for Politics. Frankly, if the Obama campaign can't win Virginia, with its super-low 5.6 percent unemployment much of it due directly to federal spending and defense infrastructure then one wonders how they can prevail, he says.
Though it suffered an estimated $4.4 billion second-quarter loss related to its bungled trading in some very risky types of investments, JPMorgan Chase said this morning that it still did well enough in its other businesses that it had net income of $5 billion in those three months., As our colleagues at Planet Money said Thursday, even though the high-profile losses were huge, the nation's largest bank could probably absorb them, and even make up for them with income from elsewhere in its operations. That seems to be what happened., According to bank CEO Jamie Dimon, importantly, all of our client-driven businesses had solid performance., And concerning the trading losses, Dimon said in a statement that we have put most of this problem behind us and we can now focus our full energy on what we do best serving our clients and communities around the world., NPR's Jim Zarroli is due on Morning Edition today to talk about the bank's second-quarter results. Click here to find an NPR station that broadcasts or streams the show., Update at 2:30 p.m. ET. Total Loss From Trade Mess Has Grown To $5.8 Billion:, Because it also ran up $1.4 billion in losses related to the bad trading scheme in the first quarter, JPMorgan says its total loss as of now from the scheme has grown to $5.8 billion., Update at 8:50 a.m. ET. More On The News:, The Associated Press notes that the $4.4 billion is more than twice what the bank initially estimated its trading-related loss would be. And, AP reports, the bank said all managers in the London office responsible for the trade had been dismissed without severance pay and that it planned to revoke two years' worth of pay from each of those executives.
Half of San Bernardino County's 300,000 mortgages are underwater. In an attempt to ease the mortgage crisis, the Southern California county is considering taking control of some of those properties by eminent domain., County and city officials in San Bernardino, Calif., are considering a controversial plan: using the power of eminent domain to take over underwater mortgages, where the value of the home is worth less than the original loan. Taking on those properties, officials say, would allow the homeowners to refinance those troubled loans., Half of all 300,000 mortgages in the Southern California county are underwater, according to county officials. While some are in the process of foreclosure, a good number of affected homeowners are still paying their mortgages with only dim hopes that their homes will ever recover in value., The situation isn't much better in the city of San Bernardino. This week, the council voted to seek bankruptcy protection one more indication of the region's distress., A Test Case, If San Bernardino County implements the plan, it would become the first local government to use its powers for this purpose, and would quickly become a test case for a novel approach to the mortgage crisis., Despite efforts by the federal government, the state government, private enterprise, the attorneys general you go down the long list we've come up with no solutions, says entrepreneur Steven Gluckstern., So, just over a year ago, Gluckstern and his colleagues formed what eventually became the firm Mortgage Resolution Partners. Their goal: to devise a plan that would fix the housing problem while also making money., When you owe more on your house than the house is worth, your behavior changes, says Gluckstern, now the firm's chairman. You don't spend money going to a local restaurant, you don't hire the local handyman. So our thesis is, unless you fix this problem, you can't really ever have the recovery we're all hoping for., 'Unusual And Unique Action', Gluckstern says the way banks packaged and traded loans before the housing sector collapsed makes the loans difficult to modify. What's needed to undo that, he argues, is a powerful legal tool that can force mortgage investors to sell those loans and cut through all the red tape., We have to take specific and, I think, unusual and unique action, Gluckstern says., And the appropriate action, according to Mortgage Resolution Partners, is eminent domain., Governments typically use eminent domain to compel takeover of property for projects like highway construction or, in some cases, private development., But there are two basic constraints for eminent domain: It must serve a public purpose, and the property owner must receive just compensation., In this latest proposal, San Bernardino County, along with two of its largest cities, Fontana and Ontario, would use eminent domain to buy loans where the homeowner is underwater but current on payments. Participation would be entirely voluntary., The loans would be acquired at a discount large enough to enable new lenders to refinance the mortgage at a lower amount, if the homeowner so chooses., The entire program would be funded by Mortgage Resolution Partners. The firm would, in turn, collect a fee for every loan that's modified., A Controversial Plan, David Wert, a spokesman for the county, says public discussion has only just begun on the proposal, and that nothing has been decided., But, Wert says, the county has already heard from many homeowners who support the plan and many, he notes, already want to sign up. , But the proposal has also garnered lots of vocal opposition., Eminent domain is created for public benefit. And the majority of the benefit for this [plan] is private, says Paul Herrera, government affairs director for the Inland Valleys Association of Realtors., Herrera says San Bernardino's plan would only enrich Mortgage Resolution Partners whose original members included Phil Angelides, former California state treasurer and chairman of the Financial Crisis Inquiry Commission, the federal entity looking into the cause of the financial crisis., Chris Katopis, executive director of the Association of Mortgage Investors, also opposes the plan. He says the proposal would rip off mortgage investors who argue that the value of their contracts entitles them to be paid in full., This really sends a signal that it's bad to do business in San Bernardino, and that if you play by the rules, you could get harmed, Katopis says., In the future, he says, banks will either charge more for lending in the region, or will choose not to lend at all., Court Challenge Likely, Those arguments don't sway Acquanetta Warren, mayor of Fontana, one of the cities considering the proposal., I came from Compton, South Central L.A., where they had nothing but redlining. I'm used to banks not doing the right thing in our areas, Warren says., Warren herself is underwater on her mortgage; her home is worth almost one-third less than what she owes. And when you're underwater, she says, just modifying a home loan is hard enough., The eminent domain proposal, Warren says, is just about investigating other options. But the banks, she says, are trying to shut down the discussion, instead of saying, 'You know what, can we come to the table and talk? Can we figure out how we can help people?' , And because homeowners must be current on their payments to qualify, Warren notes the eminent domain option is specifically for people who have been playing by the rules., Both sides acknowledge that the proposal, if adopted, will likely end up in court., Harvard law professor Howell Jackson says the outcome of a legal challenge will ultimately depend on the structure of the final deal. But, he says, My own personal view is this is a legitimate public purpose, and the community would benefit from having these properties cleaned up., Meanwhile, Mortgage Resolution Partners says it's currently in discussions with other cities, as well.
Mitt Romney has an offshore investment account that he set up in Bermuda 15 years ago., Mitt Romney has an offshore investment account that he set up in Bermuda 15 years ago., New questions about Mitt Romney's overseas investments have dogged the GOP presidential contender all week. Many arose from a report in the latest issue of Vanity Fair. It describes how the day before Romney was sworn in as governor of Massachusetts, he put a corporation he'd set up in Bermuda in a blind trust held by his wife, Ann. Romney insists he did nothing wrong., That investment account, called Sankaty, was established 15 years ago. Romney first revealed his ties to this offshore entity in the 2010 tax return he released in January. Earlier this week on Fox News Radio, he defended his actions., I have followed the law. I have paid my taxes as due, he said. I have also disclosed through all of the requirements of the government every asset which I own, fairly and honestly., The Records, So what was the advantage of setting up Sankaty High Yield Assets Investors Ltd.? The American lawyer who set up Romney's corporation in Bermuda declined to comment for this report. So did Romney's longtime associate, Brad Malt, who administers the trust where it's now held., Bermuda may be tiny, but it's got loads of lore. Two centuries ago, the British hatched plans here for the War of 1812. These days, Bermuda attracts cruise ships as well as foreign money., If it's registered here, it's registered here for a reason ... maybe to the benefit of the shareholders of that company, policeman Andy Morgan says of Romney's investment., For a $20 fee, you can check out the documents that established Romney's own corporation at Bermuda's Registrar of Companies. The folder is slim just 10 pages., Romney's name does not appear anywhere. The entity he created in October 1997 is described as a holding company initially authorized to have 12,000 shares worth $1 each. Within three years, seven other Sankaty investment funds were also established in Bermuda., U.S. records show at least $25 million worth of stock most of it for Domino's Pizza was sold from Romney's holding company while he was governor of Massachusetts., Government officials in Bermuda seem extremely reluctant to discuss Romney's investment., Bermuda doesn't want to get too drawn into we don't want to get drawn in at all, says Nea Talbot, public affairs officer at the Department of Communication and Information., The Thistle House in Hamilton, Bermuda, is listed as the address of Mitt Romney's Bermuda corporation., The Thistle House in Hamilton, Bermuda, is listed as the address of Mitt Romney's Bermuda corporation., Bermuda's Bad Rep, The law firm that has the Bermuda address for Romney's holding company doesn't want to get involved either. It's located in a gleaming, five-story building known as Thistle House in the heart of Hamilton, Bermuda's bustling capital., The building appears to be home in name alone to Romney's Bermuda account. In the marble-floored lobby, corporate finance lawyer Steven Rees Davis is getting a coffee. He won't say which firm he works for because he says his opinions are his own, but he says he's annoyed that Romney's business in Bermuda is now making waves., It's the American politicians that make it out to their public that ... anybody who does business with Bermuda is like a dirty old man dealing with pirates, he says., As Rees Davis notes, U.S. law actually lets Americans lower their tax bills by parking investments in Bermuda, which has no income tax., Why would you operate in a certain manner and pay a certain amount of tax when legally you could just change that and do something differently and pay less tax? he says. So why would you buy bottles of Goslings Rum duty-free when you leave the country when you could go buy it at Front Street and pay full duty for it? ... Well, because we get it duty-free. Everybody does it., Experts say Romney appears to have set up a retirement account in Bermuda with hedge fund-type investments that would otherwise be taxed in the U.S., We don't have full knowledge of Gov. Romney's tax situation, so we can't say for sure, says James Hines, an international tax expert at the University of Michigan, but yeah, it looks like ... you can call it tax avoidance. You can call it facilitating investments that otherwise wouldn't be ... profitable., Anyone else who had enough money to buy a company, Hines says, could do it, too.
JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon, here seen in June testifying before a congressional committee, will try to explain the bank's trading losses to investors on Friday., JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon, here seen in June testifying before a congressional committee, will try to explain the bank's trading losses to investors on Friday., Ever since the peak of the financial crisis, we've been treated to the occasional spectacle that leaves the market and its hangers-on in a tizzy: unveiling the terms of new bailout programs, revealing bank stress-test results, and, not long ago, JPMorgan Chase's chief executive on the hot seat before Congress., Friday brings us another in the series: JPMorgan Chase will announce its second-quarter earnings. Normally, this would be a moderately significant event, thanks to JPMorgan's size and the fact that it's reporting first among the big banks., But this time, there's a bigger draw: The company is expected to update the world on its multi-billion-dollar losses, the result of the London whale and detail what the company is doing in response., The whale, of course, refers to a JPMorgan trader in London who has been blamed at least in part for an ill-fated investment strategy that, as of May, had cost the bank $2 billion. Since then, reports suggest the losses could have ballooned to as much as $9 billion., The big bank is pulling out all the stops. It's breaking the news at 7:30 a.m., instead of its typical 9 a.m., presumably to give the market more time to digest any unpleasantness. An executive overseeing the company's investigation into the losses will join Chief Executive Jamie Dimon and other regulars on the earnings call. The company is gathering stock analysts at its headquarters, instead of just holding the usual conference call, Bloomberg News tells us., For those listening at home (or at the office), the Associated Press offers four key questions as a guide: How big are the losses? How much pay will the company try to claw back from which executives and former executives? How will Dimon come off brash or cowed? And, of course, how will the losses affect profits?, We'd add a few other thoughts:, That bit about profits is probably the least significant. Unless the losses have grown phenomenally, JPMorgan can probably absorb them, and even make up for them with income from elsewhere in its operations. If necessary, it can always sell some long-term investments, recognizing gains that add to income. That kind of low-quality earnings isn't what investors prefer they like income from ongoing and healthy lines of business, rather than quick one-time fixes like asset sales but the bottom line isn't expected to suffer dramatically., Also, watch what the bank says about the risk of more losses to come. Whatever dollar figure JPMorgan puts on the trading losses tomorrow, they could keep growing unless the bank manages to close out of its positions, which is taking some time., Finally, what effect, if any, will JPMorgan's new disclosures have on regulatory reform efforts? JPMorgan's struggle with its whale of a bet has driven home just how risky and impenetrable the big banks still are. That has sharpened attention on banking regulation more than anything we've seen in a while. Another Bloomberg article says the SEC is already looking at pushing banks to disclose more about how they model potential losses. Depending what the company says, and whether it comes off as sufficiently penitential, regulatory efforts across the banking sector could gain or lose steam., Oh, and if you like the idea that JPMorgan might try to recoup pay from some executives involved in the losses, don't hold your breath. Clawbacks are not only rare, they can drag on for months or years without resolution, if the executive decides to fight the move.
A lobster on a boat off Mount Desert, Maine, is measured to see if it is a legal size. There has been a glut of lobster this season, driving down prices., A lobster on a boat off Mount Desert, Maine, is measured to see if it is a legal size. There has been a glut of lobster this season, driving down prices., This summer is shaping up to be a record season for lobster landings in Maine. That sounds like good news for a state where lobstering makes up a large part of the economy., It may be welcome news for consumers and food retailers, but for the state's 5,000 lobstermen, it's a different story., Hard To Make A Living, On Portland's waterfront, about five lobster boats are tied up at one of the piers. Half a dozen lobstermen stand around discussing the current problem of oversupply., Willis Spear says he's rarely seen a more desperate situation for Maine's lobster catchers and he's been at it for 47 years. With prices where they are, he says this is a good chance to stay off the water and catch up on other stuff., The price is so low that we're really not making a living, he says. So I'm just going to attend to the business at the house until we see an increase in price., This lobster glut comes as a result of the earlier-than-usual appearance of soft-shelled lobsters a factor that many attribute to warmer ocean temperatures., These softer creatures don't ship well live, so they're either consumed locally or sent to processing plants on the East Coast, where their meat is stripped to go in lobster products like chowder., This unexpected glut, however, means the processing plants and lobster pounds where lobstermen hold and sell the lobster have a huge backlog to clear., Rare Calico Lobster Turns Heads, And Escapes Dinner Menu, Tying Up The Boats, The result is that lobstermen like Spear are being paid nearly half the amount they were getting just a few years ago. He says the current boat price is about $2.50 a pound., Which is not worth going out for. I'd love to see $3, and that would be still pretty low for the expenses we have now, Spear says., Spear says that because of the price of bait, fuel and labor, it costs him nearly $500 a day just to check his traps. He has 800 of them., It's a predicament that has prompted lobstermen along much of the Maine coast to tie up their boats until prices improve., Many of them have contacted Maine's Department of Marine Resources, asking that they close down the fishery. The state, however, does not have the authority to do this., Good For Someone's Business, While lobstermen wring their hands, consumers are making the most of the low prices. At a busy intersection in South Portland, Maine native Barbara McFarlane parks her car and heads for an early lunch at Docks Seafood restaurant and market., We just love lobster. We're Mainers, and usually we can't afford it, she says. It's grand to be able to afford it this year., McFarlane is eyeing a twin lobster dinner for just under $16. Restaurant owner Bob Coppersmith says last summer, that same meal could have cost nearly $30., The current lobster glut, he says, is bringing in about 300 customers a day not bad for a 75-seat establishment., It's unbelievable. The business has been really going strong, Coppersmith says. Everybody wants lobsters because they're at a good price. Some people are coming in a couple of times a day., If you want to make the most of Maine's cheap lobsters, the sooner you come here the better. Experts say they've never seen soft-shelled lobsters this early in the season, and they don't know how much longer they'll be around.
A worker dismantles a mattress at a recycling facility in Oakland, Calif. The material will be used to make carpet products and proceeds will help support the St. Vincent de Paul Society of Lane County, a nonprofit that helps low-income families in Eugene, Ore., A worker dismantles a mattress at a recycling facility in Oakland, Calif. The material will be used to make carpet products and proceeds will help support the St. Vincent de Paul Society of Lane County, a nonprofit that helps low-income families in Eugene, Ore., The bad economy has hurt many nonprofits around the country, even as demands for their services have grown. That's certainly the case in Reading, Pa., which has been labeled the poorest city in America, with a poverty rate of more than 41 percent., Now, one local nonprofit, Opportunity House, hopes to salvage some of its services by salvaging junk., Looking For Help, Opportunity House has provided day care, housing and other services to low-income families in Reading for many years. Because of state budget cuts in Pennsylvania, the nonprofit now gets less money to subsidize round-the-clock day care for parents who might not otherwise be able to work. To make matters worse, enrollment in the day care center is down because unemployment is so high, leaving the nonprofit with a $335,000 deficit., As a result, the charity's president, Modesto Fiume, did something he hoped he'd never have to do: He laid off 20 percent of his staff., It was an absolutely horrible, horrible experience, he says., Seventeen low-wage workers, including teacher aides and assistant teachers, lost their jobs. Fiume knows that most of them will have a hard time finding other work., Terry McDonald, executive director of the St. Vincent de Paul Society of Lane County, is known to some as the junkyard king because he spends so much time trying to turn waste into cash., Terry McDonald, executive director of the St. Vincent de Paul Society of Lane County, is known to some as the junkyard king because he spends so much time trying to turn waste into cash., It was a lot of tears and a lot of people upset because some of these people had worked with us for a number of years, he says., Fiume has also had to cut back day care services on Sundays. He says donations and volunteers help his organization make ends meet, but not nearly enough. Like many nonprofit leaders, Fiume is desperately looking elsewhere for help., The Junkyard King, One place he's looking is clear across the country, where another charity uses junk to help support services for the poor., At a 26,000-square-foot warehouse in Oakland, Calif., a worker with thick gloves puts a stripped-down box-spring mattress on what looks like a big meat slicer at a deli. As he pushes the mattress forward, the metal springs are sheered off the wooden frame., He just literally pulled about a hundred staples out of that piece of wood, explains Terry McDonald, who oversees the operation. But he did it with that machine in just a few seconds., McDonald is known to some as the junkyard king, because he spends so much of his time trying to turn America's waste into cash. But his real job is executive director of the St. Vincent de Paul Society of Lane County in Eugene, Ore., The nonprofit has turned mattress recycling into a big business that supports services for low-income families. It's the largest mattress recycler in the country. With one facility in Oakland and another in Oregon, it recycles about 175,000 mattresses a year., McDonald holds up a piece of quilted cloth and foam that's been stripped from one of the mattresses in the Oakland warehouse., Credit: Kainaz Amaria and Pam Fessler/NPR, That material is recycled into commercial carpet, he says. The next layer underneath, that is generally a polyurethane foam pad, and that's recycled into residential carpet pad., McDonald says about 90 percent of a mattress can be recycled into something else and sold., Reinventing The Model Of Help, Mattress recycling is only one of many businesses, or social enterprises, that McDonald runs. St. Vincent de Paul Society of Lane County also operates thrift shops, repairs appliances and makes furniture anything McDonald can think of to use stuff that other people discard., And the payoff is big. These enterprises raise enough money to cover more than half of the Oregon charity's $24-million-a-year budget., The model is that if there's an opportunity to add value to something, let's do it, says McDonald., &ldquo; If you want to survive as a nonprofit ... then you have to kind of reinvent yourself., - Modesto Fiume, president of Opportunity House, a nonprofit that helps low-income families in Reading, Pa., That model is getting lots of attention these days, as nonprofits struggle to survive. The Robert Wood Johnson Foundation has given McDonald a half-million dollars to spread the word. He's already helped set up mattress-recycling operations in Orlando, Fla., and Bridgeport, Conn., Now, he's talking to Opportunity House and officials in Reading about how they too might tap into trash., Fiume, Opportunity House's president, says a recycling facility would create meaningful jobs that pay above-minimum wages and provide health benefits. That would mean a lot in a city that's been bleeding jobs for years. Fiume knows it could also make Opportunity House less dependent on donations and government funds., If you want to survive as a nonprofit and you want to continue to meet the needs of the folks who are most in need of support, then you have to kind of reinvent yourself, he says. So that's what we're doing., Fiume is now trying to figure out the next step: where to get a warehouse, equipment and startup funds. For a nonprofit more accustomed to helping the poor than running a business, it's a whole new world.
Mary Schapiro, chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, and Gary Gensler, chairman of the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, before a June congressional hearing. Both agencies adopted hundreds of pages of rules this week., In Tuesday's show, economist Luigi Zingales warned that massive, overly complicated laws and regulations go a long way toward undermining public trust in the government. They leave only lobbyists and lawyers reading the rules, in the pursuit of loopholes., By coincidence, on Tuesday a key federal financial regulator said it had approved a collection of definitions and conditions for regulating a big chunk of the derivatives market., It was several hundred pages long., The derivatives in question are swaps instruments that let two institutions trade interest rates or currencies, or make bets on a company's or country's ability to repay its debts., So a bank might promise to pay a client a fixed interest rate on a set amount of money; in return, the client promises to pay the bank a rate that fluctuates with market conditions. If the variable rate stays below the fixed rate, the client wins; otherwise, the bank does., Under the Dodd-Frank financial-regulation law enacted in July 2010, two agencies share jurisdiction over the derivatives market: the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission., Both agencies passed related measures earlier this week, including key definitions for terms like swap and security-based swap agreement. Both agencies trumpeted the progress publicly: Here's the SEC's press release; CFTC Chairman Gary Gensler said in a statement at a commission meeting that the agencies' actions mean light will begin to shine on the swaps market for the first time., If you want to take a look at the rules for yourself, you'll have to wait a bit: Each agency's final rule is being prepared for publication in the Federal Register, an exacting process of formatting, proofreading, and, for something this high-profile, maybe also one last check from senior officials. Final versions could take another day or two to appear online., The agencies told us there were no drafts available online, although they did provide fact-sheets (the CFTC's was 10 pages long) and a Q&A; (four-plus pages) about the package. (Initial proposals, which can differ substantially from the final rule, were posted for public comment months ago.) Bloomberg News reports that the full document was 600 pages long; an agency official told Planet Money that about half of that consists of a required cost-benefit analysis., The SEC passed its version on July 6 in a non-public process that amounted to circulating the document among the agency's commissioners, who voted unanimously in favor. At the CFTC, there was an open meeting on Tuesday, where commissioners voted 4-1. Bart Chilton, a Democratic commissioner and the lone dissenter, said he worried that financial firms could exploit regulatory exemptions in the measure, according to news accounts of the meeting., That's one of the the risks Zingales raised when he highlighted the sheer size of the full Dodd-Frank law, which weighs in at more than 2,300 pages. By contrast, Zingales said, the law creating the Federal Reserve was just over a dozen pages, proving that even major initiatives can be implemented concisely., I want rules that are simple enough that there can be a public debate, and that individuals can pressure their congressman or congresswoman to vote in the way they want, because they have an opinion, he told us.
The millennial generation doesn't shop at the grocery store the way their parents and grandparents do., The millennial generation doesn't shop at the grocery store the way their parents and grandparents do., Supermarkets have spent decades catering to the needs and wants of baby boomers, and now the millennial generation is disappointed with what they're finding at traditional grocery stores, and are shopping elsewhere in greater numbers., In fact, a new market research report called Trouble in Aisle 5 reports that millennials buy only 41 percent of their food at traditional grocery stores, compared to the boomers' 50 percent., Instead of buying the same brands from the same store every week like their baby boomer parents or grandparents, millennials, or those born between 1982 and 2001, value convenience and freshness over brand or store loyalty, the report says., The study, a survey of 2,000 adult grocery shoppers in the U.S., was conducted by Jefferies, a global investment bank, and AlixPartners, a business advisory firm., Differences may stem from the millennial generation's inclination to multitask, even at the supermarket, the report suggests. These results mean that the new generation expects food to be very convenient, but they also don't want to compromise freshness or value., Millennials, generally speaking, are not a one issue generation. Natural and organic, flavor, and convenience mean a lot, says Scott Mushkin, Managing Director of Food and Drug Retailing at Jefferies., And above all, convenience is key. Grocery delivery services, convenience stores, and online retailers are becoming increasingly important food sources for the latest generation of shoppers., This need for instant access seems to be very characteristic of millennials. They treat their multi-tasking hand-held gadgets almost like a body part, says a study of the generation published by Pew Research Center, and covered by NPR in 2010. More than eight-in-ten say they sleep with a cell phone glowing by the bed, poised to disgorge texts, phone calls, emails, songs, news, games, and wake-up jingles, the Pew study reports., Millennials are channel surfers, jumping from one retail channel to another because that's what suits them, says David Garfield, Managing Director at AlixPartners. Boomers are more consistent in where they shop and what they shop for. How many channels you communicate in, in your life, dictates how you act in the shopping world, he says., As boomers age, the financial uncertainty of retirement keeps many buying just the basics, which can be bad news for grocery stores. On some levels, boomers are not becoming great customers because of where they are in life, Mushkin says. Millennials, on the other hand, are good customers. They seem to want to pay more for attributes that they value., However some trending items, such as fresh and organic foods, seem to be important to both generations. Millennials seem obsessed with what they put in their bodies and boomers are obsessed with making their bodies last as long as possible, Mushkin tells The Salt., And this next generation of shoppers is a growing force in the marketplace. Millennials will make up approximately 19 percent of Americans in 2020, while at the same time, the population of baby boomers in the United States sinks below 20 percent, the study notes., Some big grocery store chains, like Safeway, are incorporating the needs of millennials into their future business plan by offering store-brand organic products, grocery delivery, and smartphone apps. Even staple brands like Campbell's are now trying to embrace organic trends. But a lot of these changes don't seem to be translating into dollars at the checkout., There seems to be this trend that they [millennials] will go to Amazon or Target or Wal-Mart for Cheerios or Diet Coke, but they'll go to Trader Joe's or Whole Foods for their fresh and organic needs, Mushkin says., Mushkin says that the study provides good news for natural foods stores, as well as mass merchants who deal in groceries and more, like Target and Wal-Mart. Mass merchants are becoming the cross section; everyone goes there for different reasons. But it's a really tough study for the traditional grocery business.
Last week, we re-aired an episode recorded in 2010 with economist Joshua Gans, author of the book Parentonomics. In the episode, Gans' 11-year old daughter, B., told us about his technique for keeping her from spending too much allowance money on candy:, If you want to buy candy with your allowance, you have to pay to your parents a 100 percent health tax, said B., At that time, Gans said the tax was working. B. had never paid it., ....I have earned no revenue from health tax, which is a shame. It might have been a way to claw back enormous allowance, he told us., After the episode re-aired last week, Gans reflected on effectiveness of the tax, two years later. This is from a post he wrote for Forbes:, Of course, we are now two years down the track with a more independent child. The issue with independence is that allows for another thing that often accompanies attempts to collect a tax: under-reporting. It did not take us too long to discover that the allowance was being used to purchase candy and my daughter owed a ton of back taxes., As for Gans's other children, the tax hasn't been a total failure. He writes that they don't have the same preference for candy as B. so he and his wife have gotten some good behaviour for free., Outside of his home, Gans thinks his tax may hold a lesson for Mayor Bloomberg's attempt to eliminate extra large sugary drinks:, The best one can say for things like a health tax is that they put an issue on the table. They might be able to nudge behavior in a good direction but they cannot be expected to make great leaps and bounds. This is the same tension that Bloomberg will face with the 'Big Gulp' regulation in New York. It will be good for nudges but those who want lots of soda will get lots of soda.
Thousands of unemployed people wait outside the State Labor Bureau in New York City to register for federal relief jobs in 1933., Thousands of unemployed people wait outside the State Labor Bureau in New York City to register for federal relief jobs in 1933., The long economic downturn that began in late 2007 came to be known at the Great Recession - the worst period since the Great Depression of the 1930s., Even though both events were momentous enough to earn the word great as a modifier, they really are not comparable, according to recent research by economist Mark Vaughan, a fellow at the Weidenbaum Center on the Economy at Washington University in St. Louis., It's now clear the Great Recession was the worst downturn of our lifetime the worst since the Great Depression, Vaughan said. But in terms of human suffering, it pales in magnitude with the 1930s., The Great Depression was painful in ways we can scarcely imagine now because we have grown so accustomed to having a government-funded safety net, he said., For example, the unemployment rate hit a peak of 10 percent in October 2009, but Congress provided those laid-off workers with extended unemployment benefits. As a result, jobless Americans were able to collect up to 99 weeks of government checks to help ride out tough times., In contrast, the jobless rate shot to 25 percent in the Great Depression and stayed in the double digits for a decade. When the job market first collapsed in 1930, workers could not rely upon unemployment insurance, food stamps, Social Security or other forms of government help, Vaughan noted., After 1933, the New Deal started to introduce safety-net programs, but they weren't there in the early 1930s and they weren't on the same scale as today, he said., Job seekers wait to attend a job fair in the Brooklyn borough of New York City in 2010., Job seekers wait to attend a job fair in the Brooklyn borough of New York City in 2010., So why do so many people today feel the Great Recession was miserable enough to be in the same ballpark as the Great Depression? In November 2008, for example, TIME magazine's cover inserted Barack Obama's face into a famous photo of Depression-era President Franklin D. Roosevelt., Vaughan says people may feel the Great Recession was so bad because the recovery has been so slow paced. Today, the unemployment rate remains high at 8.2 percent, economic growth is weak around 2 percent, foreclosures are still going forward, and both consumers and business owners remain very worried about looming problems, such as a financial crisis tied to European debt troubles., Vaughan says this has been the most painful economic period Americans under 80 can remember. For those who lost both jobs and homes all while carrying heavy consumer and student debt this has indeed felt like a depression, which actually has no official definition. But generally, economists say a depression is an event that lasts at least two years and involves a sustained decline of about 10 percent of gross domestic product., Vaughan has compiled lots of statistics to measure the magnitude of the two great downturns of the past century. He did find some interesting parallels between the Great Depression and the Great Recession., Here are some similarities:, Both were preceded by good economic times., - 1921-29: Annual real economic growth was 4.4 percent, - 1982-2007: Annual real economic growth was 3.2 percent, Both were preceded by the movement of banks into new business lines., - 1920s: Banks ramped up real estate lending/investment banking, - 1990s-2000s: Banks ramped up real estate lending/securitization of mortgages, Both were preceded by innovations in consumer finance., - 1920s: Installment consumer credit (e.g., monthly payments for autos), - 2000s: Banks ramped up real estate lending/securitization of mortgages, Both were preceded by asset bubbles., - 1920s: Florida real estate boom and the stock market, - 1990s-2000s: Residential real estate and the tech-stock boom, Both followed an era in which the Federal Reserve was highly regarded., But the differences are huge because the Great Depression was much worse. The chart below makes the comparisons., Credit: Angela Wong / NPR; Source: Mark Vaughan &ndash; Weidenbaum Center fellow
Egg producers and the Humane Society agree on a bill to require larger chicken cages, but the pork and beef industries fear they're next and are fighting it., Egg producers and the Humane Society agree on a bill to require larger chicken cages, but the pork and beef industries fear they're next and are fighting it., Remember our reports a few months ago on the odd couple who struck an innovative compromise between egg producers and animal welfare activists? (Here's a hint: The deal calls for egg producers to replace their standard cages with new enriched accommodations, complete with perches and nest boxes where chickens can lay their eggs.), Well, that deal seems to be in trouble. It's running into a fierce counterattack from America's hog and beef producers even though those industries aren't mentioned in the proposed deal, and aren't directly affected by it., The deal has a crucial weakness: It only takes effect if Congress writes the new compromise standards for chicken housing into law. The United Egg Producers (UEP), which represents most of the country's egg production, says that's necessary. If the standards are voluntary, says the UEP, any farmer who ignores them and sticks with old-style cramped cages will be able to sell eggs more cheaply and put his competitors out of business., Essentially, the egg industry is asking for regulation the first regulation, in fact, that considers the emotional well-being of America's farm animals., And that is enough to send the National Pork Producers Council (NPPC) and the National Cattlemen's Beef Association into full-blown fury. They fear a slippery slope: If Congress can regulate the housing of chickens, what's to stop it from regulating the living conditions of hogs and cattle?, In fact, the Humane Society just announced it's suing 51 industrial-style intensive pig confinement operations for violating clean air laws. And animal husbandry practices are already under fire, given recent fast food chain announcements about buying crate-free pork., The NPPC has called the egg legislation a Federal Farm Takeover Bill. In addition, pork and beef producers believe that compromising with the Humane Society can lead to no good. In an interview with NPR, the president of the National Cattlemen's Beef Association called it a deal with the Devil., Members of Congress (especially Republicans) who support the new egg regulation have been targeted by a new organization called Keep Food Affordable. For instance, here's an attack ad aimed at Rep. Michael Grimm (hat tip to our colleague at the Washington desk, Brian Naylor, for alerting us.), This organization's web site describes itself as coalition that brings together consumers, farmers, and food security organizations, but contains no other information about its members or backers not even an address or phone number. However, in an interview that was videotaped this summer at the World Pork Expo in Des Moines, Iowa, an official from the National Pork Producers Council said that right now, it's funded mainly by NPPC., So far, the red-meat lobby is winning. The egg producers and the Humane Society had hoped to attach their proposal to the farm bill, which is currently inching its way through Congress. The Senate, however, never even brought this proposal up for a vote. Backers of the deal will have one more chance in the House of Representatives, although some analysts say the bill will have to wait until after the elections., A final note: Some animal welfare advocates also oppose the egg deal; they think it's a sellout to agricultural interests, because it allows egg producers to continue putting chickens in cages, even if those cages are bigger. Their arguments, however, aren't getting much air time on Capitol Hill.
The debate is back over what to do with the Bush tax cuts, which are scheduled to expire at the end of the year., The Obama administration wants to extend them only for families earning less than $250,000 a year. Republicans generally favor extending them for everyone. What hangs in the balance are tax breaks for wealthier Americans., So just how much are those worth? About $56.3 billion in fiscal 2013 alone, the Tax Policy Center estimates, using Treasury data, or about $850 billion over 10 years (thanks to the back-loaded nature of some of the tax breaks). That's how much more the federal government could collect if the administration's proposal goes through, as opposed to extending the cuts for everyone., Here's how that figure compares to the taxes the federal government actually collected in 2011:, Source: White House Office Of Management And Budget, Treasury, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, Of course, $56.3 billion is real money, but context is everything. It's only about a quarter of what we spent on unemployment benefits last year, and about 1 percent of all the money the government spent in 2011., The Tax Policy Center estimate is necessarily rough, thanks to scant detail in current proposals. Of the $56.3 billion total, almost half would come from reinstating the 36-percent and 39.6-percent individual income-tax brackets: $23.1 billion. Nearly as much ($21.5 billion) would come from reinstating a higher tax rate on dividends. Taxing long-term capital gains at 20 percent adds another $5.8 billion, and reinstating a limit on itemized deductions for upper-income Americans adds $4.4 billion. Phasing out the personal exemption with income adds $1.5 billion., We also noticed that the amount at stake in 2013 is a little higher than the $54 billion in revenue that Kraft Foods reported in 2011. By comparison, Apple's revenue topped $108 billion for the year, not quite double the tax breaks at issue., This isn't the only way to think about the Bush tax cuts, of course. On Morning Edition on Tuesday, Tamara Keith looked at how the debate affects the middle-class, and the post includes a chart breaking down tax benefits by income., If you've seen any other good charts out there, let us know in the comments., Note: We've modified the graphic to clarify the description of the additional tax revenue.
Another kind of claws at work. Meanwhile, JPMorgan is going to see if legal steps will let it clawback some money paid to executives., Another kind of claws at work. Meanwhile, JPMorgan is going to see if legal steps will let it clawback some money paid to executives., JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon predicted this would happen: The bank plans to reclaim millions of dollars in stock from executives at the center of the trading blunder that shocked Wall Street, The Wall Street Journal reports., According to the Journal:, The nation's biggest bank is expected to claw back compensation from individuals including Ina Drew, who ran the company's Chief Investment Office, or CIO, according to people familiar with the bank's plans., A clawback, one of the financial world's best words in our opinion, is the recovery of money which has been already paid to a person or company, typically because that payment should not have been made for legal (or occasionally moral) reasons. (Cambridge University Press)
Economist Luigi Zingales says that the U.S. may be following the path set by Silvio Berlusconi, Economist Luigi Zingales says that the U.S. may be following the path set by Silvio Berlusconi, You'll hear the complaint every now and then, when the global economy comes up, that the United States is becoming like Greece, or Spain, or Italy., But when Luigi Zingales says it, he should know: He's a University of Chicago economist. He was born in Italy. He studies, among other things, what has set the American economy apart from places like Italy., And he's worried., On today's show: How the U.S. is taking a few early steps down the risky road toward Italy, and how it could change course., Zingales says, he has watched Americans lose faith in their government as U.S. politicians vacillate between catering to corporate demands and pushing populist responses to public outrage ping-ponging between the bailouts of 2008 and 2009 and proposals intended to rein in big bonuses or other examples of corporate excess., As companies and individuals lose faith in the basic fairness of the government, Zingales argues, they put more energy into seeking special favors from politicians, and less into innovation., Even efforts to rein in bad behavior can backfire. Consider the Volcker rule, which is designed to limit the risks that banks can take if they stand to beneefit from government in a crisis. It sounds good, but it's complicated. And, Zingales says, the more nuanced a rule becomes, and the more it carves out exemptions even exemptions that seem to make sense the less effective it becomes., The solution, Zingales argues, is to make laws simpler, easier for lawmakers and the public to understand. That makes it harder for companies to game them, and harder to win the kind of special treatment that undermine trust., Music: Future of Forestry's Chariots. Find us: Twitter/ Facebook/ Spotify/ Tumblr., * More from Luigi Zingales:, His latest book: A Capitalism for the People, A Wall Street Journal opinion piece: Crony Capitalism and the Crisis of the West, A New York Times op-ed: The College Graduate as Collateral
Applicants wait to enter a job fair in New York City last month., Applicants wait to enter a job fair in New York City last month., There were 3.6 million jobs open and ready to be filled in May if the right candidates came along, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported this morning., That was up from 3.4 million in April, was the second-most for any month so far this year and was up 16 percent from the 3.1 million in May 2011., But we also know that employers only increased the number of people on their payrolls by 77,000 in May (and an estimated 80,000 in June). And we know that the unemployment rate has been stuck above 8 percent since February 2009., It would be unrealistic to expect that every job would suddenly get filled. And in a dynamic economy, jobs are always opening up and vacancies are being created., But why is there such a huge gap between the number of new positions being filled and the number of openings that businesses say they have?, As NPR's Marilyn Geewax wrote for us last month, one theory is that too many employers are being way too picky they're looking for the perfect candidates when there are many well-qualified people seeking work who might be just what's needed if given a little training., There's also a case to be made that while many employers say they have openings they want to fill, they're really not all that keen to hire until they see the economy pick up some steam. Of course, in order for the economy to gain strength there needs to be some job growth. So their reluctance could just be prolonging the problem., Politicians, as always, are pointing fingers at each other., The good news in the new figures, according to The Associated Press, is this: A rise in openings could mean hiring will pick up in the coming months. It typically takes one to three months to fill a job.
The Bronx has lagged as the rest of New York City has boomed., This week in The New York Times Magazine, Adam Davidson asks why the borough hasn't been able to catch up with the rest of New York City's phenomenal economic growth:, ...In the early 1970s, the Bronx and Brooklyn had similar average household incomes. Since then, though, the gap has grown significantly. The average Brooklyn resident is now around 23 percent richer than the average Bronxite; people in Queens are roughly 32 percent richer. (Manhattan residents are 265 percent wealthier; Staten Island residents, by the way, are 55 percent richer.) What happened?, Read the full column to find out why the Bronx should look to places like Pittsburgh for economic inspiration.
Robert Diamond, the newly departed chief of Barclays bank, won't collect millions in stock bonuses on his way out the door., Ex-Barclays CEO Robert Diamond., Ex-Barclays CEO Robert Diamond., He'll still get his annual salary and a one-time payout, worth about $3 million, according to Reuters., Barclays is embroiled in a scandal over LIBOR interest rates. As Planet Money's Robert Smith explains, Barclays' traders tampered with the rates for bank purposes, affecting trillions of dollars in worldwide contracts:, LIBOR, as it turns out, is the rate at which banks lend to each other. And more importantly, it has become the global benchmark for lending. Banks look at it every day to figure out what they should charge you for not just home loans, but car loans, commercial loans, credit cards. LIBOR ends up almost everywhere., Diamond ran Barclays until last week when the scandal broke open and he resigned., He was apparently pushed by the Bank of England, according to Marcus Agius, the off-again, on-again Barclays chairman. The Guardian reports Agius gave gripping testimony to British lawmakers today who are investigating the LIBOR scandal. He said the Bank of England governor warned Barclays that Diamond no longer had regulators' support., Agius also told the lawmakers of Diamond's decision to forgo his bonuses. Agius also quit over the scandal, but was returned to his job by the board of directors to help seek Diamond's replacement, notes Reuters.
Josh Walling and Randi Cartmill with their children, Jacqueline, Josh and Ryan. Josh Walling says his family, whose household income is below the national median, would lose a substantial amount of money if the Bush tax cuts expired., Josh Walling and Randi Cartmill with their children, Jacqueline, Josh and Ryan. Josh Walling says his family, whose household income is below the national median, would lose a substantial amount of money if the Bush tax cuts expired., The first in an occasional series, Fiscal Cliff Notes, which breaks down the looming fiscal cliff of expiring tax cuts and deep automatic spending cuts set to hit around the first of year. , If the Bush-era tax cuts expire at year's end for all income groups, here's how much Americans with different annual income would be affected, on average., Source: Tax Policy Center, Credit: Alyson Hurt / NPR, 1/2 = The reduction in the child tax credit. The child tax credit would drop from $1,000 per child to $500 per child., 50 percent = The tax increase on the first $17,500 of taxable income for families and couples and $8,750 for single individuals. The 10 percent tax bracket would disappear if the tax cuts are allowed to expire, meaning the first $59,300 of taxable income for families and $35,500 for individuals would be taxed at a 15 percent rate., $1,800 = The average estimated tax increase to be experienced by people in the middle of the income distribution (range $33,500 to $59,500).*, 95.9 percent = The percentage of middle-income taxpayers expected to see their taxes go up if the tax cuts expire.*, 4 percent = The average percentage decline in after-tax income for middle-income households if the tax cuts expire.*, *Source: Urban-Brookings Tax Policy Center Microsimulation Model, Much of the political focus when discussing the Bush-era tax cuts is on the wealthy, but they're not the only ones who would be affected if the tax cuts are allowed to expire at the end of this year., The vast majority of American taxpayers would take a hit, including Randi Cartmill and Josh Walling, who live in Madison, Wis., with their three children., The family's household income hovers a little below the national median, in the $40,000 to $50,000 range. Cartmill says the tax cuts have helped the family's bottom line., I remember when they went into place and being pleasantly surprised by how much more money we got back, she says., In part, that's because the tax cuts doubled the tax credit for each child from $500 to $1,000. The cuts also created a new tax bracket for the lowest levels of income, which gives most families an $875 break. If these cuts were to expire, the Cartmill-Walling family's after-tax income would drop by about $2,500., That's a substantial amount of money, says Cartmill. Generally ... what we do with our tax refund is we use that as kind of our savings in the bank for [if] the car breaks down or the water heater goes or whatever and we have a big expense all at once., The way Walling sees it, that's like a 5 percent cut to their income on top of other blows they've taken as a result of the tough economy., I don't think my wife was explaining quite how hard it is, you know, but that's pretty much where it's at, Walling says., And they're not alone., The nonpartisan Tax Policy Center estimates 96 percent of taxpayers at the middle of the income distribution would see their taxes go up an average of about $1,800 a year, says Roberton Williams, a senior fellow at the center., That will reduce their after-tax income by about 4 percent, Williams says. Four percent if you're spending every dollar you've got makes a noticeable dent in your budget., To give a sense of the other side of the ledger, according to the Joint Committee on Taxation, extending just the higher child tax credit over the next decade would add almost $270 billion to the deficit.
Brian Gasiewski removes the external housing for an industrial shock absorber from a CNC, or computer numerical control, machine at Fitzpatrick Manufacturing Co. in Sterling Heights, Mich., Brian Gasiewski removes the external housing for an industrial shock absorber from a CNC, or computer numerical control, machine at Fitzpatrick Manufacturing Co. in Sterling Heights, Mich., Politicians have touted modern manufacturing as the solution for lifting the economy and providing good jobs., But today's manufacturing work requires strong math skills not just adding and subtracting, but a good grasp of fractions, decimals and basic trigonometry. And job applicants who want to go into manufacturing often don't have what it takes., So colleges and nonprofits, especially throughout Illinois, are stepping in to bridge this skills gap by combining manufacturing training with basic reading and math., Doing Math On The Job, During the recession, more than 2 million manufacturing employees lost work. Since then, just about half a million jobs have come back. You can do the math: that means at least 1.5 million people are still out of work., But when you talk to employers, they say they can't find good people to hire. North American Tool Corp.'s Jim Hoyt has two openings right now for his northwest Illinois company, and he expects to continue hiring. But he often sees the same problem crop up during the application process., Preschool: The Best Job-Training Program, I'll write a few numbers down, mostly numbers with decimal points, because that's what we use in manufacturing, and have them add them or subtract them, or divide by two, Hoyt says. Job applicants often can't do the math., Having basic math knowledge, especially of decimals, is important because of the precise inputs modern machines need. Like most manufacturers, North American Tool uses CNC, or computer numerical control, equipment. CNC machines make everything from the cutting tool parts North American Tool makes to automotive and medical equipment., But calling these machines computerized is almost a misnomer because there are still plenty of manual calculations. And if you're off, even by a fraction, the equipment can crash., Hoyt says a CNC crash usually happens because of a number that's typed in wrong or calculated incorrectly. I'll hear a wreck in my office and pretty much the whole shop will get quiet, he says. Those crashes can cost tens of thousands of dollars in fixing the expensive CNC machines and lost productivity., Learning The Basics, These days, many employers don't want to teach the basics and risk damaging equipment. So students have turned to vocational programs at schools like the Richard J. Daley College on Chicago's South Side to learn how to operate CNC machines., Ray Prendergast, who directs the college's manufacturing programs, says algebra and basic trigonometry are prerequisites. The college's admissions testing measures entry-level proficiency. But Prendergast says, The majority of students who come into my program are not at English 101, and they're not at Math 118., So Daley College just began offering remedial education for manufacturing. In the past few years, these bridge programs have become especially popular throughout the Midwest, where many who offer CNC or welding courses realize the students just aren't ready to go straight into the coursework., Becoming The Next Generation, Nonprofits, including the Jane Addams Resource Corp., one of Chicago's first bridge programs, are also stepping up to meet the training needs,, Bernarr Patton, a former student there, says his bridge instruction was essential for what he wants to do now. The training has helped him with all the mathematical calculations involved in welding., He says he also wants to go into welding to follow the footsteps of his uncle, an iron worker who started his own company. Patton hopes becoming part of the newest generation of manufacturing workers will be a good enough business that maybe he can pass it on to his two sons.
TED spread charts like this one from June 2011 have been used to judge whether the financial markets are worried about the health of the big banks., TED spread charts like this one from June 2011 have been used to judge whether the financial markets are worried about the health of the big banks., Over the last week or so, we've been watching the scandal over manipulation of LIBOR, perhaps the single most important global interest rate: See Robert Smith's piece on Morning Edition, and Tuesday's podcast. Today the spotlight turns to a call made to Barclays by a British central-bank official., The coverage led one commenter on our Facebook page to ask what it all meant for another number that was once common in financial chit-chat: the TED spread, which was watched closely during the financial crisis (including here at Planet Money). It was a handy way of gauging how risky the banking system was., It's a good question, so we asked around., First, a quick refresher on the TED spread itself: It boils down to the difference between what the U.S. government has to pay to borrow over the short term, and what banks have to pay to borrow from each other. The bigger the gap between the two (the spread), the more worried banks are about one another's health: Banks have to pay more to borrow when lenders are nervous. Government borrowing costs are measured using three-month U.S. Treasuries. Bank borrowing costs are measured using yup, you guessed it LIBOR., But wait! People now have good reason to suspect that banks have been trying to manipulate LIBOR. That means the gap may actually have been wider than it seemed during the financial crisis in other words, things things were probably worse than we thought. It also means the TED spread is probably a less reliable measure of bank health., Complicating things still more, uncertainty in Europe means U.S. bonds are in high demand. That skews the government-borrowing end of the calculation as well. Put the two together, and the TED Spread may be going the way of cat entrails, says Dan Alpert, a managing partner at boutique investment bank Westwood Capital and occasional economic commentator., So investors and analysts are left with a real problem: how to measure the day-to-day riskiness of the banking system. One banking analyst I talked with says some people are using a complex kind of investment called an overnight indexed swap, which is based on the Federal Reserve's Federal Fund Rate and then comparing that to LIBOR. Not much help when LIBOR itself is suspect, but as the analyst said to me, Do you have a better alternative?, Chalk up one more way the LIBOR scandal is causing problems.
LIBOR affects many consumer credit rates, from mortgages to credit cards., A lot of the coverage of the LIBOR scandal has focused on the ways that Barclays tried to manipulate LIBOR lower during the financial crisis, to make the bank look more secure. This has led some listeners to ask a good question: if rates were being shoved down, doesn't that help consumers? LIBOR, after all, is a financial benchmark that shows up in adjustable rate mortgages and other loans. In response to our piece on Friday, Listener Cameron Napps wrote:, They [banks] were lowering LIBOR rates and BENEFITING the 'average Joe'... The only people who have gotten screwed by the deal are the institutional traders ... who were on the other side of rigged trades., Partially true, but the scandal is bigger, and more complicated, than that. Regulators at the Commodity Futures Trading Commission say specifically that traders at Barclays attempted to manipulate rates both higher and lower, depending on which kind of contract the traders wanted to make money from. The CFTC released several emails that specifically asked for the rate to be set higher. Here's one:, We have another big fixing tomorrow and with the market move I was hoping we could set the 1M and 3M Libors as high as possible (May 31, 2006, Trader in New York to submitter), Part of the confusion here is that there are two different phases of the scandal: Greed and Fear., Greed (2005-2007): Before the financial crisis, we have evidence that traders routinely asked for higher and lower rates to make a few extra bucks. It wasn't one conspiracy, but many different people trying to influence specific bets they made on LIBOR. These were likely small changes, but with billion dollar bets hanging in the balance around the world, it could mean a lot., Fear (2007-2009): After the financial crisis started, Barclays was less worried about money and more worried about survival. There was pressure from management to manipulate LIBOR in one direction only: down. This is because no bank during this period wanted to admit that its borrowing costs were high. If a banks submission to LIBOR looked high, it might have signaled trouble at the bank (since it would mean other banks were reluctant to lend to it). So all the manipulations during the Fear period were to push LIBOR lower., So who are the victims?, If Barclays traders managed to get the rates higher before the financial crisis, as they requested, then consumers suffered. Any loan that was adjusting based on LIBOR might have a slightly higher rate. Its hard to tell at this point just how much rates changed, but it's a possibility., When the rate was going down during the crisis, consumers might have gotten better deals on their loans. But that doesn't mean we should celebrate. A lot of cities and pension funds and transportation systems had money in LIBOR based investments. They would have made a lot less money if LIBOR was manipulated down. The City of Baltimore, for instance, is suing and claims to have lost millions of dollars in the manipulation., In the end, we may never know the final score of who won and who lost money. The changes were small, and it's hard to prove where the rate would have been if not for the actions of Barclays and other banks. But whether LIBOR was manipulated up or down, the real victim is trust in the banking system. If banks will lie so casually about one of the benchmarks of the financial world, what else will they lie about?
Morning light on the houses of Parliament in London, where Bank of England Deputy Governor Paul Tucker faces questions over his role in a banking scandal., Morning light on the houses of Parliament in London, where Bank of England Deputy Governor Paul Tucker faces questions over his role in a banking scandal., The scandal over LIBOR, a key global interest rate, has already hit banks around the world. Today, it moves to the very heart of the British government., A deputy governor of the Bank of England will be quizzed by parliament on whether he told banks to lie to about the crucial interest rate., Paul Tucker is one of the most influential central bankers in the world. Many think he's next in line to be in charge of the Bank of England. But he's been dragged into this scandal over LIBOR, the interest rate that sets the rules for trillions of dollars of financial contracts., Big banks report the rates they pay to borrow money that's how LIBOR is set. The hearing centers around a phone call Tucker made during the financial crisis in 2008. He called the head of Barclays bank and basically said, hey, I noticed that your interest rates seem a little high. That might have raised the specter that Barclays like so many banks at the time was in trouble., So after that phone call, word went out through Barclays to get the rate down. Traders at Barclays had already been messing with the rates after this call, it became widespread., Today, a parliamentary hearing asks the question: Did Tucker, a governor of England's central bank, encourage the lying? This week, the buck passes from the banks to the government.
Wendy Brown of Schenectady, N.Y., holds a sign before an Occupy Albany rally pushing for a raise in New York's minimum wage on May 29, 2012., Wendy Brown of Schenectady, N.Y., holds a sign before an Occupy Albany rally pushing for a raise in New York's minimum wage on May 29, 2012., Back in 1912, Massachusetts became the first place in America to introduce a minimum wage, but it would take another quarter century before a national minimum wage was set., President Franklin Roosevelt made it law in 1938, that any hourly worker had to be paid at least 25 cents an hour. It was revolutionary, and very few countries had anything like it., Every few years, the federal minimum wage would go up, helping millions of Americans inch closer to a middle-class lifestyle. Something changed in the early 1970s, however, and since then, the minimum wage has fallen by around 25 percent., Fast-forward to today. The minimum wage is currently $7.25. But in 1968, you'd make the equivalent of $10 an hour in today's money., Think about the people that in 1968 got the minimum wage, [and] then think about the group today, says Sen. Tom Harkin of Iowa. It's basically the same group, but they have 30 percent less buying power., Harkin, a Democrat, has introduced a bill in Congress to raise the minimum wage to $9.88 an hour. For millions of Americans, an increase in the minimum wage could make a huge difference, but the battle has not been easy., Fighting For More, In 2008, President Obama campaigned on a promise to raise the minimum wage. He hasn't. Mitt Romney has said he supports pegging minimum wage to inflation, but recently backtracked, and he now opposes an increase., According to the Economic Policy Institute, if Harkin has his way and the minimum wage was actually raised to $9.88 an hour, it would increase wages for 30 million Americans 10 percent of the country., Harkin tells weekends on All Things Considered host Guy Raz that his proposed increase would give hourly wage earners more spending money to help improve the economy., People who are making the minimum wage, basically they're spending just about all their money because they don't have much left, Harkin says. So if you give them a raise, it means more for our gross domestic product., &ldquo; $5,000 a year is significant ... [It] may not get them out of poverty, but it makes life better., - Sen. Tom Harkin, D-Iowa, Harkin estimates that his minimum wage increase would mean about $25 billion more for GDP, 100,000 more jobs and 28 million Americans would get a raise., To those that say raising the minimum wage would actually increase unemployment, Harkin says there's simply no proof of that. He says they've found that when minimum wages were increased, employment actually went up., Harkin says he's not Pollyannish about the prospects of the bill, and doesn't think Republicans will let it go through. But it is important, he says, to bring it up so that Americans will know where Democrats stand on an issue as fundamental as keeping the minimum wage at a level that provides a decent support for people that are very poor., If my proposal went through, a $15,000 a year worker will make $20,000 a year, he says. You know $5,000 a year is significant to someone in that category. [It] may not get them out of poverty, but it makes life better., Surviving On Minimum Wage, Every morning at 1 a.m., 50-year-old Margaret Lewis rolls out of bed to start the workday. She works as a transporter for the disabled at O'Hare International Airport making minimum wage. Compared to a lot of hourly workers, however, she's lucky. In Illinois, the minimum wage is a dollar higher than the national rate., Lewis lives in one of the roughest parts of Chicago's South Side Englewood with four of her children in a modest, three-bedroom apartment. All of her children who live at home are in school, and that's the reason she took the early shift to make sure her kids are fed and get to school., Lewis works full time and works hard, but even with tips, her annual salary about $18,000 is still about $10,000 below the U.S. poverty level for a household her size., It takes an entire paycheck, she tells Raz, to cover back-to-school shoes for the kids. Clothes come from thrift stores, food stamps help a lot, and her monthly rent is $850., I never can pay a whole rent, Lewis says. Her family covers the remaining rent by doing work for the landlord. We do janitor work around [and] keep the grass cut. In the winter, we make sure the porch is shoveled., In the past year, two people have been killed on her block. In the morning, when her kids have to get themselves off to school, she worries. She says the last shooting was a few months ago and unfortunately it happened at the same time her son was leaving the block going to school, when the bullets rained out., That was the most scariest moment of my life, she says. You know it's not the greatest neighborhood, but if I move, it'll be in the neighborhood of this [type] as well because that's where the most affordable rent that fits my budget will be in., A $1 increase an hour would mean more than $2,000 a year for someone like Lewis., It might not sound a lot to most people, but to me that much in a year would make a big difference in my household, she says., The Business Of Minimum Wage, Opponents of Harkin's minimum wage bill point to jobs, saying that with such high unemployment, an increase in the minimum wage will make a bad situation worse., Joe Olivo owns a small printing press in New Jersey that employs 47 people. Olivo tells Raz that a higher minimum wage basically raises the whole wage scale and would force him to make cuts., What happens is the employee who's been here for 3 years and has more experience than a person making an entry-level wage, they will rightfully want more for their seniority, Olivo says. So what it does to me as a business owner, by pushing up wage scale, it increases my expenses., Olivo says that means he either has to increase revenues difficult in the current economy or he must find ways to cut expenses: cutting employees, not hiring new employees or bring in new technology to decrease the number of employees he needs., So it really hurts my current employees and it also prevents me from bringing on new ones, he says., Bill Dunkelberg, chief economist for the National Federation of Independent Businesses, a group that lobbies against increasing the minimum wage, says that every dollar an employee gets comes out of somebody's pocket. He says it's not logical that raising the minimum wage will add more spending money to the economy., It's not the job of businesses to turn themselves into social service providers and pay in excess of value to the firm, Dunkelberg says. We do have something called the earned income tax credit, where we provide supplemental income to people who are working but need more money., Right now, 18 states have set minimum wage rates slightly higher than the national level, while four states actually have exemptions and even lower minimums.
British banking giant Barclays is at the center of an interbank loan rate scandal that caused several high-ranking executives to resign and forced the company to pay $455 million in fines., British banking giant Barclays is at the center of an interbank loan rate scandal that caused several high-ranking executives to resign and forced the company to pay $455 million in fines., Many of us were introduced to the term LIBOR for the first time this week, when it was revealed that some banks might have been manipulating the dull but vital interest rates to gain an edge in the market., LIBOR the London Interbank Offered Rate is a series of interest rates determined by a handful of representatives from the biggest banks in London. The rates are what the banks would charge other banks to borrow on different loan categories, which determines the global flow of billions of dollars and perhaps even the interest rate on your savings account or home mortgage., We're talking about the reference rate by which ... the most complex derivative to the credit card in your pocket is actually set, says Mark Blyth, an economist at Brown University., The scandal forced chairman Marcus Agius and CEO Bob Diamond of British banking giant Barclays to resign, and the company has agreed to pay $455 million in fines to regulators in the U.K. and U.S. It was at Barclays that emails appeared to show bankers willing to manipulate the rate, but several other banks including American ones are now under investigation., To sort through the rubble of the LIBOR scandal and find out more about potential fallout, weekends on All Things Considered host Guy Raz talked with Matt Taibbi, a contributing editor at Rolling Stone, and MIT economist Simon Johnson. Johnson's most recent book, White House Burning, is about America's national debt., Interview Highlights , On why people in the U.S. should care about the LIBOR scandal, Matt Taibbi: Because the scale is just mind-boggling. Every town and municipality in America probably has investment holdings that are pegged to LIBOR. I think The Wall Street Journal calculated $800 trillion of financial products. So if there's cartel-style corruption that is affecting the LIBOR rate, it is just impossible to imagine a financial corruption scandal that is bigger in scope than this., Simon Johnson: Pensioners. Everyone who has saved [or] ... put any kind of money into products that [are] linked to a fixed interest rate you may not even know that that is where your pensions come from, but it typically is all of those people are losing when interest rates are manipulated down., On the rationale by banks for the manipulation, Taibbi: [Barclays] released an email the other day that suggested that they were actually quasi-suggested by the Bank of England to do this because during that crisis period ... everybody was worried about the appearance of financial soundness of these banks. The problem is: Where does it end? When the government can just step in and change numbers to suit itself, or the banks can do that, then we're really not dealing with a free market anymore. If they're going to make that argument I don't think that's going to hold up., On how to resolve the problem, Taibbi: They gave Barclays a record fine ... but that's not going to be enough to change the way these banks do business. There have to be high-level criminal prosecutions for them to really make changes, and I worry that's not going to happen., Johnson: Criminal prosecutions where appropriate would absolutely begin the process of changing the culture. LIBOR should not be based on what a banker tells you in principal he or she could borrow at, it should be based on actual transaction data. That's what we do in other financial markets. It should be exactly the same thing for [LIBOR] rates: real transaction data without rigging, without cheating [and] without any kind of cartel operation., The people in charge of overseeing how banks operated have failed us again, on an enormous scale. I worry a great deal about the impact on the confidence in the banking system.
President Obama steps onstage before a campaign event in Poland, Ohio. He recently underlined the importance of campaign finances to supporters in an email that began, I will be outspent., President Obama steps onstage before a campaign event in Poland, Ohio. He recently underlined the importance of campaign finances to supporters in an email that began, I will be outspent., I will be outspent. This simple phrase headed an email President Obama recently sent to supporters., We can be outspent and still win, the message read. But we can't be outspent 10 to 1 and still win. Obama asked for donations of as little as $3 to compete against the deep pockets of Republican challenger Mitt Romney and the super political action committees that back him., Pro-Obama superPACs simply haven't been able to keep pace, Robert Draper writes in this week's New York Times Magazine., Republican superPACs Crossroads GPS and Restore Our Future expect to raise a total of $400 million by the time the election comes around in November. An additional $400 million has been pledged by billionaire brothers Charles and David Koch., The pro-Obama superPAC Priorities USA, on the other hand, hopes to raise $100 million, according to Draper., There's absolutely no arms race here, he says. Basically, they've implicitly conceded that they cannot match dollar-for-dollar, he says., Draper spoke to weekends on All Things Considered host Guy Raz about whether the Democrats can still gain an edge., On the pro-Obama SuperPAC Priorities USA, Fully a year after the Citizen's United Supreme Court decision, a number of superPACs had cropped up as a direct result of that decision, but none on the Democratic side. And concern was mounting in a lot of corners that this sort of unilateral disarmament that had, in large part, been promulgated by President Obama ... was going to have major consequences in the 2012 election., So, [Priorities USA founders Bill Burton and Sean Sweeney] figured this was a void they would fill and were not deterred by the fact that they'd never done anything like this before these guys were messaging and campaigning strategy guys, not guys that went around raising money from rich people., On the Obama's change of heart on superPACs, Obama had staked out a position that these superPACs were bad, and I think he read correctly, for the most part that a lot of Democrats would feel that way. But by December of 2011, when the gross disparity between what the Republicans were raising in terms of superPAC monies and what Priorities USA was raising ... then the campaign manager Jim Messina showed those numbers to fellow adviser David Axelrod ... It was at that time that Obama finally said, 'We're not going to unilaterally disarm,' and 'Go forth and prosper, Priorities USA., On Priorities USA's strategy , Given that they can't match the Republicans dollar-for-dollar, what they believe that they've got to do ... is to frame Romney in a very negative light, to basically tell a story of Romney that would repel voters from him., What they came across ... was a narrative based on Romney's time at Bain Capital, the private equity group., Their thinking behind this is not just that all these people who were laid off as a result of certain acquisitions of companies by Bain, but it was even more effective as a means of explaining who Mitt Romney is because Romney's message he's been telling people over and over is, 'I understand how the economy works.' ... And the rejoinder in these ads that Priorities USA has put out is implicitly that he does know how the economy works, but he's only interested in making it work for rich guys like himself., On the effectiveness of Priorities USA's ads , There's pretty hard statistical evidence that both sides have seen that in swing states and amongst independent voters ... that Romney's unfavorables have gone up and those people who've been polled and been interviewed about this have in fact cited, 'Well, it's terrible what he did, laying off these people.', It's clear that it's having an effect now. Will it ultimately have that much of an effect? Will they manage to turn that many voters, especially given that in the fall, these hundreds of millions of dollars from the Republican side will be unleashed in terms of negative attacks on Obama? Will their ability to shake up swing voters in these particularly targeted areas make much of a difference? We'll have to see.
The city of Scranton, Pa., sent out paychecks to its employees Friday, like it does every two weeks. But this time the checks were much smaller than usual. Mayor Chris Doherty has reduced everyone's pay including his own to the state's minimum wage: $7.25 an hour., Doherty says his city has run out of money., Scranton has had financial troubles for a couple of decades the town has been losing population since the end of World War II. But the budget problems became more serious in recent months as the mayor and the city council fought over how to balance the budget., Doherty wants to raise taxes to fill a $16.8-million gap. The city council wants to take a different approach and borrow money. City council members did not respond to NPR's requests to discuss the dispute., I'm trying to do the best I can with the limited amount of funds that I have, Doherty says, I want the employees to get paid. Our people work hard our police and fire I just don't have enough money and I can't print it in the basement., After paying workers Friday, the city had only about $5,000 left in the bank. More money flowed into city accounts that day, but it was still not enough to pay the $1 million the city still owes to its nearly 400 employees., Scranton's public workers received a few days' warning this was coming. John Judge, a firefighter and president of the International Association of Firefighters, Local 60, typically receives about $1,500 every two weeks, after deductions. On Friday his check was less than $600 before deductions., Don't know how I'm going to pay bills at home. I may be able to stave it off for a little while, Judge says. [The] kids aren't going to be able to do certain activities this summer maybe we're not going to be able to go on vacation., The firefighters' union, along with the police and public works unions, have taken the city to court. Lackawanna County Judge Michael Barrasse issued an injunction, essentially agreeing with the unions that the city was breaking the law, but Doherty says he doesn't have another choice. Despite the injunction, he had the city send out paychecks based on minimum wage., The unions plan to be back in court first thing Monday morning to ask the judge to hold Doherty in contempt., There's been no love lost between Doherty and the public employee unions because of this battle; they've already spent the past decade in a legal dispute over pay that went all the way to the state supreme court. Both sides come to this latest battle with plenty of baggage and hard feelings. But with nearly 400 city workers receiving a fraction of the pay they typically get, pressure is building to resolve the issue soon.
Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney speaks about the monthly jobs report Friday in Wolfeboro, N.H., Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney speaks about the monthly jobs report Friday in Wolfeboro, N.H., Like any Oval Office incumbent seeking re-election, President Obama would prefer to have the economy exceeding expectations in terms of job creation at this point in the campaign., But exactly four months from Election Day, the economy isn't cooperating. In fact, it's doing just the opposite, underperforming job-growth forecasts in recent months., Given the trend, it seems unlikely the four monthly jobs reports to be issued between Friday and Election Day will change the pattern in which our politics now seem trapped:, The Labor Department issues a disappointing report on the first Friday of the month. Republicans quickly seize on it as proof of Obama's allegedly failed economic policies. White House officials and other Democrats urge everyone to focus on the good news in the reports, that there is indeed net job creation, though not nearly enough to drive down significantly the jobless rate., That pattern was on display Friday, with Republican Mitt Romney taking a break from his Wolfeboro, N.H., vacation to tell reporters that the June numbers were a kick in the gut., Meanwhile, campaigning in Poland, Ohio, Obama said the more than 80,000 jobs created in June was a step in the right direction., President Obama speaks Friday at a campaign event in Poland, Ohio., President Obama speaks Friday at a campaign event in Poland, Ohio., Despite the political spin that gets ginned up at this point every month, the jobs reports aren't exactly telling us much of anything new about the economy. All indications are that the economy is stuck in a lower gear than is needed to create jobs for the millions who are out of work, which is certainly bad news. But the data suggest that the economy isn't in reverse, either., This pace of job growth means two things, writes Heidi Shierholz, an economist with the liberal Economic Policy Institute, who says the U.S. economy has a deficit of 10 million jobs: We are not in nor are we slipping into another recession, but neither are we getting the kind of job growth that will bring down the unemployment rate. In other words, the labor market is treading water. This would be perfectly fine if we were at full employment, but with the unemployment rate now above 8 percent for 41 months straight, this is an ongoing, severe crisis for the American workforce., Conventional wisdom has it that it's a crisis for the president, too. It's repeated quite often that since 1960, there have been four presidential elections featuring incumbents in which the unemployment rate has topped 7 percent: 1976, 1980, 1984 and 1992. And only in 1984 did the incumbent, Ronald Reagan, keep his job., With that history and the jobless rate now at 8.2 percent, it would seem Obama would be poised to see his one-term proposition come true., But it's important to keep in mind that other factors arguably played as great if not greater roles as the unemployment rate in the incumbents losing. (Last month at this time, The New York Times' Nate Silver weighed in with data on the complicated and tenuous relationship between unemployment rate and an incumbent's re-election prospects.), In 1976, President Gerald Ford was hurt by his pardon of Richard Nixon., In 1980, President Jimmy Carter was damaged by a primary challenge by Sen. Ted Kennedy., And in 1992, H. Ross Perot's third-party bid pulled votes away from President George H.W. Bush and allowed Bill Clinton to win with just 43 percent of the popular vote., So there may be less than initially meets the eye in drawing a correlation between high jobless rates and incumbents losing their jobs., Still, the lackluster economic growth and job creation are considerable forces propelling Romney's candidacy. Romney has made the economy's underwhelming performance which he blames on Obama the crux of his argument for why a change is needed in the White House., And there's nothing on the horizon that suggests that Romney will be forced anytime soon to shift strategy. If anything, the slowdown of economies in Europe and China suggest the situation may get even worse for the U.S. economy before it gets better., While Obama certainly can't do much about the global economy's impact on the U.S., he can direct voters' attention to successes on the jobs front, as he's done during his bus tour in Ohio this week., In that critical battleground state, with many companies that supply the auto industry, Obama made sure to repeatedly cite his actions to save the U.S. auto companies while reminding his audiences that Romney argued against such moves., Then there's this. Obama has repeatedly shown that it's a mistake to misunderestimate him, as his White House predecessor might have said., At nearly every turn in his political career, he has wound up humbling his doubters. Winning a statewide race in Illinois as an African-American from Chicago with the name Barack Obama. (People downstate will never vote for him some of us said.) Wresting the Democratic presidential nomination from the far-better-known Hillary Clinton. Signing health care legislation into law. All these were once thought to be impossible. He has shown a resilience and political wiliness that has often left his opponents wondering what happened., Whether he will be able to once again defy political gravity remains to be seen. But Obama has proved that betting against him is no sure thing.
Yahoo and Facebook have agreed to re-sheath their patent swords and play nice at least for now., The two companies have struck a broad advertising partnership as part of a deal to end a patent dispute, Kara Swisher reports on the technology blog All Things Digital, quoting sources close to the situation., According to the blog, the arrangement involves no exchange of money, but instead a deal for joint online advertising sales and cross-licensing of key patents., Yahoo filed suit against Facebook in March, claiming the social media giant infringed on 10 of its patents dealing with advertising and privacy controls. Yahoo added two other patent infringement complaints later., All Things Digital reports that the deal could lead to further lucrative advertising agreements between Yahoo and Facebook., The Yahoo-Facebook deal stands in sharp contrast to the $550 million that Facebook paid to Microsoft to settle a similar dispute., According to All Things Digital:, Discussions to settle the lawsuits negotiated by Yahoo interim CEO Ross Levinsohn and Facebook COO Sheryl Sandberg, among others began almost as soon as Yahoo's board ousted former CEO Scott Thompson [who had] ... reportedly promised directors that a big financial payoff of many billions of dollars could result from the patent lawsuits against Facebook., Meanwhile, The Wall Street Journal reports today that Levinsohn is short-listed as a permanent replacement for Thompson, along with Hulu CEO Jason Kilar., The newspaper said that Yahoo got to know and was apparently impressed with Kilar over the past year after attempting to buy all of Hulu last year., UPDATE at 3:50p.m. EST:, Hulu, in an email to reporters, said Kilar isn't going anywhere:, As has been reported, Jason Kilar has been a focus of the Yahoo CEO search committee. He has graciously declined to be considered, the company said.
John Pham (right) reviews Bob Drake's resume at an AARP event aimed at helping older workers improve their job search. Workers age 55 and older cite particular difficulty finding employment, and some are choosing to retrain for new careers., John Pham (right) reviews Bob Drake's resume at an AARP event aimed at helping older workers improve their job search. Workers age 55 and older cite particular difficulty finding employment, and some are choosing to retrain for new careers., Deborah Klein sits in a parked car, a pile of envelopes on her lap. She's looking for work as a pharmacy technician, and has come to a faded strip mall near Waterbury, Conn., to drop off resumes with employers., I hope they get in touch with me, they want to meet with me, and who knows they may have a position, Klein says. It may not be now, but if I put something in their hand, they have something to think about., &ldquo; There's nothing better than getting up in the morning and going to work. I'm not ready to give that up., - Deborah Klein, on launching a new career at 62, Klein has her work cut out for her. Waterbury's unemployment rate is the highest in the state. And Klein has been unemployed for a while her last full-time job, working for a software company, was in 2008. She's answered hundreds of job ads since being laid off, but has had little luck landing interviews., At 62, one of Klein's obstacles may be her age. One of the few times she was called in for an interview, she sensed immediately that age would be a barrier., I walked in and I was the old lady of the place, Klein says. I did not fit the demographic at all. The woman who was initially speaking to me was this little girl I could almost have picked her up by the scruff of her neck. I mean, you knew I was not a fit., Now, Klein's unemployment insurance has run out, she's burning through her 401(k) and she's even had to accept help from her two adult daughters., Ultimately, Klein decided to retrain as a pharmacy technician, in the hope of broadening her employment options., Starting Over At 62, Klein says her family thinks she's nuts, starting over at 62 in a field where she has no experience. But Klein, who has always liked science, graduated at the top of her class., Deborah Klein (right) meets with Tricia Brister, volunteer coordinator at Griffin Hospital in Derby, Conn., about volunteer opportunities., Deborah Klein (right) meets with Tricia Brister, volunteer coordinator at Griffin Hospital in Derby, Conn., about volunteer opportunities., Still, the notion of starting over at 62 isn't as unusual as it once was. Sara Rix, a senior policy adviser with the AARP Public Policy Institute, says labor force participation among older workers has gone up., There are many reasons for that, Rix says, including that people are living longer and want to stay active., But financial necessity is also a factor, Rix says. A lot of older people simply can't afford to retire., The recession has had a devastating impact on individuals' financial well-being, Rix says. Recovering some of those losses by remaining in the labor force longer is one of the few options over which they have some control., People can apply for Social Security benefits as early as age 62. But opting into the program so early means their monthly payments will be lower later on. So, Rix says, older workers have to make a choice., Staying Focused, For Klein, the choice was obvious. And she's gone about her job search the right way, says Stephen Romano of the Connecticut Department of Labor., She hasn't been scattered all over the place, Romano says. She's focused on one mission. ... She's going to get a job interview pretty soon, if you want my opinion on it., Back in the Waterbury parking lot, Klein approaches a drug store, looking professional in her blue dress and matching shoes., She's in luck: The pharmacist agrees to see her. He tells her she has to apply online if she wants a job. He doesn't seem too encouraging., But Klein is a positive person, and she's upbeat about the encounter., I thought he was charming. Nice man, and I think I might have ... got the feeling he would actually go in and look at my resume., Working Free, Klein has also decided she can do even more to boost her employability. A few days after the drugstore pharmacy visit, she shows up at Griffin Hospital in nearby Derby, Conn. She's decided to volunteer., I'm trying to do ... as much as I can do to get into the field, Klein says. If it means I need to get experience by working for free, I'll do it., The hospital relies heavily on volunteers and a lot of them are older than Klein. Tricia Brister, the volunteer coordinator, seems encouraging., Excellent, excellent, Brister tells Klein. We're always looking for volunteers, and [we] have weekend hours too., Klein likes the idea of coming here. Because it's not just about money, she says. She doesn't feel her age, and she still wants to work. She can't bear the thought of sitting at home watching TV all day., I'd rather be working, Klein says. There's nothing better than getting up in the morning and going to work. I'm not ready to give that up., And the years have taught Klein something: There are drugstores and hospitals everywhere. If she keeps knocking on doors she knows one of them will open eventually even if the odds sometimes seem stacked against it.
Losing your job is rarely good. Not being able to find one for months can be disastrous for individuals, and bad for society as well. Yet during the recent recession and the current anemic recovery, more people in the U.S. have been unemployed for longer than at any time since 1948., Of all Americans who were unemployed in June, almost half had been without a job for 27 weeks or longer. In other words, 5.4 million people have been jobless for more than half a year., Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, The government calls these the long-term unemployed. Experts say the longer workers are jobless, the more likely they are to lose valuable work skills. They also have a harder time re-entering the workforce than those who are jobless for shorter periods., Sure enough, the data bear this out: As of June, the number of people unemployed for less than 27 weeks had declined by about 25 percent since it peaked in October 2009. But the ranks of the long-term unemployed have declined more slowly for the same period, by about 5 percent. In other words, as unemployment comes down, the long-term unemployed aren't benefiting as much., The current recession and recovery is unusual for the sheer number of people unemployed for long periods. They haven't always made up such a large proportion of the unemployed, as shown in the chart below:, Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, As a result, on average, people today are also unemployed for much longer than they have been since the Bureau of Labor Statistics started recording this data in 1948:, Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, These figures reflect the most commonly cited measure of unemployment, excluding those who are working part time but want full-time work, and those who want a job but have given up looking., Note: This blog post was updated to reflect the numbers of this morning's jobs report.
The line at a job fair in New York City last month., The line at a job fair in New York City last month., Job growth was even weaker than economists feared in June as public and private employers added just 80,000 jobs to their payrolls, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported this morning. They had been expecting BLS would say there were closer to 100,000 more jobs in June than in May., A separate BLS survey showed the nation's jobless rate remained stuck at 8.2 percent. It's been above 8 percent since February 2009., The news will add to pressure on the Federal Reserve to do more to give the sluggish U.S. economy a boost and will add further fuel to Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney's argument that President Obama has done more harm than good when it comes to the economy. The Obama campaign counters that while job growth has slowed, there have been gains each month for more than two years as the economy recovers from what was a deep recession., This morning, Romney called the jobs news another kick in the gut to middle class families and said it shows that Obama's policies have not gotten America working again., The White House made the case that there are no quick fixes and that the nation needs to stay with Obama's policies in order to keep making progress on bringing down unemployment. The president told supporters in Ohio that there's been a step in the right direction 4.4 million new jobs in the past 28 months but that we can't be satisfied because our goal was never to just keep on working to get to where we were in 2007., We updated this post with more from the report and reactions to it., Update at 11:10 a.m. ET. We've Been Steady:, Turning to the economy, the president echoes his economic adviser's analysis (which we posted earlier), saying that turning around the economy wasn't going to happen overnight. ... We've been steady and we've worked hard to produce jobs, he says., Obama points to the 4.4 million new jobs over the past 28 months and says it's a step in the right direction., But, he adds, we can't be satisfied because our goal was never to just keep on working to get to where we were in 2007., The economy's problems, he says, are being deepened by a stalemate in Washington., Update at 11 a.m. ET. What's At Stake:, In his opening comments, the president is focusing on the campaign not the employment report. The choice in this election could not be bigger and the stakes could not be higher, he says to supporters in Poland, Ohio., Update at 10:55 a.m. ET. Obama At The Podium:, The president just came to the microphone at his campaign event in Poland, Ohio., Update at 10:15 a.m. ET. Obama Expected To Speak This Hour:, The president is due at a campaign event in Ohio this hour and C-SPAN expects to stream its coverage starting at 10:45 a.m. ET., Update at 10:04 a.m. ET. Romney Points At Obama:, The president's policies have not gotten America working again and the president is going to have to stand up and take responsibility for it, Republican presidential contender Mitt Romney says. He's also making the case again for lower taxes., Update at 10:03 a.m. ET. Romney Calls It A Kick In The Gut:, Today's news is another kick in the gut to middle class families, Republican presidential contender Mitt Romney says., Update at 10:02 a.m. ET. Romney Statement Coming Up:, The GOP candidate is due to comment on the report any minute now. C-SPAN is streaming it here., Update at 10 a.m. ET. White House Says There Are No Quick Fixes:, The economy has now added private sector jobs for 28 straight months, for a total of 4.4 million payroll jobs during that period, Council of Economic Advisers Chairman Alan Krueger says in a statement emailed to reporters by the White House. Employment is growing but it is not growing fast enough given the jobs deficit caused by the deep recession., He adds, as the White House has in past months, that it is critical that we continue the policies that build an economy that works for the middle class and makes us stronger and more secure as we dig our way out of the deep hole that was caused by the severe recession. There are no quick fixes to the problems we face that were more than a decade in the making., Update at 9:50 a.m. ET. Stocks Are Down:, In early trading on Wall Street, the Dow Jones industrial average is down about 130 points, or 1 percent. Other indices are also lower., Update at 9:45 a.m. ET. What To Say? Some Choices:, Here are some of the key words and phrases we see in news outlets' opening paragraphs about the jobs figure., &mdash; Weak., &mdash; Dismal., &mdash; Scant., &mdash; Barely picked up., &mdash; Dashing hopes., &mdash; Meager., &mdash; Lukewarm., Update at 9:25 a.m. ET. Romney To Comment:, According to a statement from his campaign, Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney will respond to the June unemployment report at 10 a.m. ET. He's on vacation in New Hampshire., Update at 9:20 a.m. ET. Unemployment Charts:, Our colleagues at Planet Money have a post showing How Unemployment Has Dragged On, In Three Charts., Update at 9:15 a.m. ET. Jobless Rate's Recent Peak Was 10 Percent:, When the economy officially slipped into recession in December 2007, BLS data show, the unemployment rate was 5 percent. It stood at 9.5 percent when the economy officially came out of recession in the early summer of 2009. From there, it rose to 10 percent in October 2009 (unemployment tends to keep going up for at least a few months after the economy starts growing again). It stayed above 9 percent until October 2009 and this year has ranged from 8.1 percent to 8.3 percent., Update at 9:05 a.m. ET. Underemployment Rose Too:, Bloomberg News points out that the so-called underemployment rate which includes part-time workers who'd prefer a full-time position and people who want work but have given up looking increased to 14.9 percent from 14.8 percent., Update at 9 a.m. ET. April Job Growth Revised Downward:, While, as we said earlier, the May job growth estimate was revised up slightly, BLS says that the change in total nonfarm payroll employment for April was revised from +77,000 to +68,000., Update at 8:55 a.m. ET. President Obama's Policies Have Failed, Boehner Says:, Today's report shows the private sector clearly isn't 'doing fine' and that President Obama's policies have failed, House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, says in a statement his office just emailed to reporters., The president needs to stop betting on his failed policies and start working with Republicans to remove government obstacles to job creation, Boehner adds., The White House typically posts its first reaction to the employment reports on its blog. We'll watch for that and pass along highlights., Update at 8:45 a.m. ET. Early Analyses:, &mdash; The Wall Street Journal says the report is the latest sign that economic growth has slowed., &mdash; Reuters says employers hired at a dismal pace in June, raising pressure on the Federal Reserve to do more to boost the economy and further imperiling President Barack Obama's chances of reelection in November., &mdash; During the winter, writes The New York Times, the economy seemed to be picking up steam, as private companies took on more and more workers and the unemployment rate dropped steadily. But then job growth slowed suddenly in March, leading some economists to wonder if the unseasonably warm winter, rather than a fundamentally healthier economy, had been the real source of the temporary employment surge., Update at 8:40 a.m. ET. More Details:, &mdash; May's Job Growth Revised Up Slightly: BLS now says there were 77,000 jobs added to public and private payrolls in May a small number in an economy the size of the USA's, but slightly more than the 69,000 in the bureau's original estimate., &mdash; Job Growth Slowed Sharply In The Quarter: According to the bureau, in the second quarter, employment growth averaged 75,000 per month, compared with an average monthly gain of 226,000 for the first quarter of the year. Slower job growth in the second quarter occurred in most major industries., Our original post, from 7:05 a.m. ET. After May's 'Lousy' News, Will June's Jobs Report Be Much Better?, Horrid. Lousy. Awful., That's how our post began last month when we reported about the May jobs report from the Bureau of Labor Statistics which showed just 69,000 net jobs added to public and private payrolls and an unemployment rate that ticked up to 8.2 percent from April's 8.1 percent., This morning at 8:30 a.m. ET, BLS is due to tell us about the employment picture in June. On Morning Edition, NPR's Chris Arnold said economists expect BLS will say there were about 90,000 jobs added to payrolls last month tepid job growth, he added. There likely weren't enough new jobs to bring down the jobless rate, economists say., Indeed, Reuters writes that job growth is stuck in low gear and says economists think the jobless rate stayed at 8.2 percent., On the slightly positive side, though, The Wall Street Journal says that Thursday's employment report from ADP (which we posted about) did spur economists polled by Dow Jones Newswires to raise their estimate of June job growth to at least 100,000 and in some cases to 125,000 from the 95,000 they had been expecting., We'll update this post with news from the report and reactions to it. Among things to watch for besides the June job growth and unemployment figures: revisions to the May numbers.
The biggest scandal in the world right now has nothing to do with sex or celebrities. It's about an interest rate called LIBOR, or the London Interbank Offered Rate., Most Americans probably never heard of LIBOR. When I first moved to New York, I hadn't. Back then, I could barely afford my apartment and got an adjustable rate mortgage. And so I wondered: When my rate adjusts, how will I know how much I'll be paying?, I searched through all the documents and it was right there LIBOR. I would be paying a few percentage points above whatever LIBOR was., LIBOR, as it turns out, is the rate at which banks lend to each other. And more importantly, it has become the global benchmark for lending., Banks look at it every day to figure out what they should charge you for not just home loans, but car loans, commercial loans, credit cards. LIBOR ends up almost everywhere., Gillian Tett, an editor with the Financial Times, says that $350 trillion worth of contracts have been made that refer to LIBOR., So literally hundreds of trillions of dollars around the world, all these deals, are based on this number. Now we find out this number might be a lie. At least one bank was tampering with that number for their own profit., We know this because federal regulators have released emails from Barclays bank that talk very casually about this manipulation. And the emails are incredible., There is a supposed to be a separation between the bankers who help set LIBOR and the traders who bet money in the market. But the emails show they routinely talked to each other., In one, a trader says: Who's going to put my low fixings in hehehe. He wrote the evil laugh right in the email., In another, traders offer to buy people Bollinger, expensive champagne, or to bring them coffee in exchange for fixing the number., One trader thanks another banker for the manipulation in an email and says, I'll put your name in a book in golden letters. The other banker responds, I would prefer not to be in any book!, Barclays says it was just a few traders behaving badly. But the scandal is about to break much wider than that. Because no bank can manipulate LIBOR alone. It's an average of data from a bunch of banks., Gary Gensler, the chair of the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission, says the emails include contact with other banks. He hasn't revealed which ones, but they have nicknames. It's safe to say its a least four other banks to benefit their profits, he says., This scandal is still unfolding. No one is sure how much money was made or lost on this scam yet. But think of it, with trillions of dollars in investments based on a number that now seems dodgy, if you lost money on a deal, you'd be calling your lawyers right now., The city of Baltimore and a pension fund in Connecticut are the first to sue, claiming the LIBOR manipulation cost them millions. More lawsuits are on the way.
Newspapers acknowledged publishing dozens of items in print or online from outsourcing firm Journatic that appeared under fake bylines. The Chicago Tribune, for example, said the matter is under investigation. But the newspaper's corporate parent, the Tribune Co., is a new investor in Journatic., Major newspapers in Chicago, Houston and San Francisco are among those this week that have acknowledged they published dozens of items in print or online that appeared under fake bylines., As was first disclosed by the public radio program This American Life, the items in question were not written by reporters on the staffs of the papers at all but by employees of what is effectively a news outsourcing firm called Journatic., The episode is at once a professional embarrassment for the papers and a reminder of an inescapable truth about the cost of gathering local news: Sometimes when you cut costs, you can't avoid cutting corners., How do you get police blotters from 90 towns? It's not easy. But that's what we do, says Brian Timpone, a former television reporter and small-town newspaper owner who created what became Journatic six years ago., He built a company to provide a lot of news and information mostly highly granular information for publishers serving small communities around the country. The information in question involves such stuff as lives are made of: information about local arrests, real estate sales, weekly school lunch menus, high school track-meet results., A screenshot of the Journatic website, announcing the company's deal with the Tribune Co., Even large papers with supposedly deeper pockets struggle for a solution., These are the challenges that newspapers face every day, Timpone says. They're the most important ones, in our opinion. And we help you solve them., News executives at the papers, and their parent companies, declined to talk about the specific incident, though each published news articles or statements about the episode. The Chicago Tribune, for example, said the matter is under investigation. But the newspaper's corporate parent, the Tribune Co., is a new investor in Journatic evidence of its appeal. (Several other papers in the chain also rely on its services.), Journatic has dozens of clients, many of them strapped for cash but all hungry to serve up local news for their readers. Many of the Hearst Co.'s papers are also subscribers. The Chicago Sun-Times had an arrangement that was to expire because of the investment by the rival Tribune Co. but announced it would sever its affiliation instantly in the wake of the radio program's report., Critics argue that Journatic is operating on a fundamentally flawed premise., It's a short-term cost-cutting measure, and that's all it is, says Tim McGuire, the former editor-in-chief of the Minneapolis Star Tribune, who now teaches media business and journalism ethics at Arizona State University's Cronkite School of Journalism and Mass Communication. It's not a long-term solution to providing local news to people who want it., Journatic started as a smaller outfit called Blockshopper focusing exclusively on real estate information. Now it boasts 60 full-time employees and 200 freelancers, expanding to sports, crime and community events., The company also hired more than 100 people abroad as a way of keeping costs down. That means people in Asia are writing about real estate in the Bay Area and sometimes under fake bylines. Raw data appear in list form; small articlelike items a few paragraphs long also incorporate personal data such as alma maters and employers gleaned from Google searches or professional social media sites such as LinkedIn., Journatic freelancer Ryan Smith told This American Life that he reworked pieces written by foreigners who were paid a pittance for their trouble and that he had written his own stories for papers in places he had never visited., I don't know those communities, and I have no stake in them. And so it didn't matter to me that I found out all the information and I got it right, Smith said. There is just something inauthentic about the whole process. And the picking of fake names for these writers in the Philippines is just a symptom of that., Journatic's Timpone concedes that the use of fake bylines was a mistake but he said they were just real estate items with transactional data like who bought what when and shouldn't have had bylines at all., Timpone said the bylines were added as a search optimization technique so the items would pop up in Google News searches. He also said that some of his colleagues have been subject to abuse online and indeed a quick search appears to yield blogs set up to object to his company's aggregation of readily available information. , Tim McGuire says it may seem appealing, but newspapers that expect to rely heavily on Journatic are unlikely to be accepted by readers in the long term., They are engaging in deception, and some would even call it fraud, McGuire says. They are pretending they are producing local news with people who are not local. I think it's naive to think that local news is only about things that happen locally. I believe local news also has to be locally produced., Yet all of this plays out against a backdrop of cutbacks in the newspaper industry as paying print subscribers and advertisers peel away. According to one industry group survey, staffing levels have fallen by more than a quarter since the year 2000., In some cases, newspapers are getting by with fewer than half as many journalists as they once did. The Tribune Co. has accelerated the consolidation of producing the news pages of its various papers throughout the country in Chicago, with the exception of its biggest paper, the Los Angeles Times., The website PasadenaNow has only two editorial employees, including its editor and publisher, James Macpherson. When he announced that he would outsource the writing and reporting of some articles about the Pasadena City Council to India several years ago, it sparked an outcry. Now, Macpherson tells NPR, he commissions stories from American and British writers living largely in Mexico and the Philippines., His site produces between 20 and 30 stories a day about Pasadena life. Most of them are not what a daily newspaper would consider hard news. But he says he does some original reporting that he shares with writers abroad along with feeds of meetings of public officials and links to public documents. And then he edits and fact-checks the stories once they're done. Without that system, he says, the site would not exist., It's the only way I can turn a profit, Macpherson says., And, indeed, some editors and innovators contend that salvation may lie in providing indispensable hyperlocal content not just news but practical information about the communities of their readers. But such hyperlocal coverage is expensive. The experiment of the Patch network of blogs, owned by AOL, has to date failed to catch fire. And other major newspapers that have experimented with hyperlocal listings and coverage, including The Washington Post, have backed away, finding it too pricey., GateHouse media, which owns more than 350 smaller daily and weekly papers, subscribes to Journatic but is replacing it with its own center for processing such material. Ten new employees, based in Rockford, Ill., will serve 30 of its papers, beginning next month. David Arkin, GateHouse's vice president for content and audience, says the company hopes to free up its reporters from more mundane tasks gathering data to do more challenging local reporting., It's a major time suck to do that kind of content, Arkin says of the hyperlocal listings. As we look at what our content goals are in our organization, we need and want more enterprise storytelling. We want more 'what it means'-type stories and packages.
New government regulations require public pools to have chair lifts, like this one in Savannah, Ga., for people with disabilities. The compliance deadline has been extended for a second time., New government regulations require public pools to have chair lifts, like this one in Savannah, Ga., for people with disabilities. The compliance deadline has been extended for a second time., Pools open to the public were supposed to have chair lifts installed for people with disabilities in time for this summer, but after a wave of protests, the federal order was delayed until January., Still, some of the country's 300,000 or so pools at hotels, parks and gyms continue to fight the requirement., Vestavia Hills pool near Birmingham, Ala., is one of thousands of pools that scrambled to get a chair lift installed by May., At first glance, it looks like a lifeguard chair, only low to the ground. It's meant to help people with disabilities get in and out of the water., It goes really, really slow, says Candia Cole, Vestavia's pool supervisor. It will pretty much submerge all the way down to where they're waist-level on the water, where they can slide out, stand up, grab hold of the side of the pool., More 'Nuisance' Than Help, May was the second installation deadline set by the U.S. Justice Department as part of a new provision of the Americans with Disabilities Act. But then many owners of the affected pools complained. Each chair lift costs as much as $8,000. And most hotel pools don't have lifeguards to operate them., Just in time for summer, some feared they'd have to shut down their pools for noncompliance. So the Justice Department extended the deadline again., Eve Hill, a disability rights attorney with the agency, says that even though this is the second deadline extension, she thinks it'll be the last., I also believe that come January, when people actually implement it, they'll go, 'Oh, this is fine,' Hill says., But the American Hotel &amp; Lodging Association says it's not fine. Kevin Maher, the group's senior vice president of governmental affairs, says a chair lift can be an accident waiting to happen., So you're putting what is essentially an attractive nuisance at the shallow end of the pool, and kids are gonna come, and they're gonna play on that and use it as a diving board, Maher says, and there's a chance of them getting hurt or damaging the equipment., Hill says there are tables and chairs around many pools. A chair lift, she says, isn't any more dangerous than that., After Getting In, Even so, how many people with disabilities will actually use one of these lifts? Melanie Manning, 26, has been in a wheelchair since she was paralyzed in an ATV accident nine years ago. She says at most pools, the water's too cold for her to get in anyway., Anything that's below 90, 92 ... I clam up. Like your whole muscles just like lock up, and I can't do it, she says., Manning swims once a week at the Lakeshore Foundation, a rehab center in Birmingham. Even if the temperature's right, she says, there are a half-dozen other things that need to be in place for her to get in the water, like a mat to be laid out on and someone strong enough to hoist her slippery, 118-pound frame out of the pool lift and back into her wheelchair., I mean, if you don't have people in wheelchairs going there regularly, or you don't have all the other accommodations they're gonna need, what's the point in the chair? she says. They're still not gonna get in there if they don't have everything that they need., 'The Water's Fine', But Hill, of the Justice Department, says the new rules aren't meant to give access to everyone with a disability., They're based for an average sort of person. So it's not designed to meet the needs of the entire range of people with disabilities, Hill says., Cole, at the Vestavia Hills pool, says that could help people who just have a hard time getting in and out of the pool but who swim just fine once they're in the water., The elderly, people with arthritis or someone who is missing a limb could benefit from the chair lift, but Cole says so far no one's asked to use it., If it's used or not, you know, it's here, so we got it ready to go, she says. Come on down! The water's fine!
Creative Hands is a therapy center in Washington, D.C., that used daily deals when it opened last year. Instead of bolstering revenue, the deals left Creative Hands' owner in the red., Creative Hands is a therapy center in Washington, D.C., that used daily deals when it opened last year. Instead of bolstering revenue, the deals left Creative Hands' owner in the red., Groupon and Living Social have sold tens of millions of daily deals and are now a major force in retail. But they rely heavily on getting businesses to offer their goods and services at deep discounts. In exchange, businesses hope for payoff in the form of return customers., Sometimes, though, the flood of extra business causes more problems than it solves., Deal-Hungry Crowd, Ailie Ham had just opened Creative Hands Massage in Washington, D.C., when she decided to offer deals through Living Social and Groupon last year., Within an hour, 900 vouchers were sold; soon, all 4,000 massages were gone., We got to the point where, literally, we [had] eight phone lines and every single day, every single mailbox was full, she says. While we were answering the phone lines, the phone was ringing., Initially, that seemed great. Ham split the sales with the dealmakers and received her cut a quarter of the normal massage price up front., Then, it was off to the races. Ham and two dozen other masseuses worked around the clock, massaging new clients. They swapped out their break-room table for a massage table. She says about one-fifth of the daily-deal clients returned again and paid full price., But I think the crowd that is attracted to a deal is attracted to a deal, Ham says. It really sets a standard for how you sell your product, meaning ... this is the crowd you're going to draw, and that's going to be the expectation., The deals also put her deeply in the red. Each voucher left her $50 short after she paid for rent, labor, laundry and massage cream. Ham had to borrow $150,000 from banks, friends and family to cover the costs of running her business., But that's not even what bothers Ham. She says that to handle the volume, she pulled multiple all-nighters, writing down all the phone numbers of Groupon customers seeking appointments by hand, only to be berated for not responding to calls sooner., I woke up crying, she says. Many, many, many mornings, I woke up crying., 'Unequivocally Good', Contrast that with Joel Mehr's experience. He owns Pete's Apizza, a gourmet pizza restaurant that has used Groupon twice to draw customers to new locations in the D.C. area., For us, I really think it's unequivocally good, he says., Mehr says the typical Groupon user spent more than the coupon. And although he can't prove it, he says it seems to have increased foot traffic., Source: John W. Byers, Michael Mitzenmacher and Georgios Zervas/The Groupon Effect on Yelp Ratings: A Root Cause Analysis, Credit: Alyson Hurt/NPR, Mehr says the upfront cash from selling 16,000 Groupons helped finance remodeling that made his business more efficient. For example, the company was able to get a longer dough-stretching table so two employees can stretch dough while one sauces the pies., But the deal came with one notable downside: Fewer stars from customer reviews on Yelp., Generally, the Groupon customers that comment on Yelp are not very good, actually, Mehr says., Worse, More Influential Yelp Ratings, This, it turns out, is common. John Byers, a professor of computer science at Boston University, recently researched millions of reviews written about many thousands of businesses that ran Groupon offers., The Yelp star rating was 10 percent lower for Groupon users than people who had visited the merchant prior to the Groupon offer, he says., Byers says Groupon buyers are not only vocal, but they also test businesses with a keener, more discriminating eye., Their reviews are longer than typical reviewers, their reviews are more widely cited, so their reviews carry more power, more weight, than just the typical run-of-the-mill review, he says., Groupon: Be Prepared, For their part, Groupon and Living Social say they offer on-the-ground support and online analysis tools to help businesses manage the flow of traffic and to help them structure the best deal., Groupon says a lot of businesses do make it work and that a quarter of its customers are repeat business., It's up to you to make sure that your staff is consistently delivering excellent results and that you're capturing the attention of that traffic that comes in your door, says Julie Mossler, a spokeswoman for Groupon. So I'd say far and away the issues that merchants see are not capacity but it's that they're not prepared.
1 of 9, There are two truths about South Bend, Ind. No. 1: You can't escape the influence of the University of Notre Dame. No. 2: You can't escape the ghost of Studebaker., South Bend may be best known as the home of the Fighting Irish, but it was once the home of Studebaker automobiles. When Studebaker closed in 1963, it left a gaping hole in the town, where unemployment is at 10.4 percent, according to the latest data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Now, the city is working hard to create a second act for the commercial life of South Bend., The Ghosts Of Studebaker, It's been decades since the last Studebaker rolled off the assembly line in South Bend, but longtime locals know this college town was once a company town. Carol Gleckler was 15 when Studebaker closed more than 50 years ago. She still remembers how her father reacted., He had tears in his eyes, worrying about how [to take care of the five kids in the family]. So many people around here worked there, she recalls. It was tough., Gleckler says she thinks the city today has gotten over Studebaker's closing. But Pete Buttigieg, the new mayor of South Bend, says some of the old-timers in town still talk about the event as if it were recent news., Getting past [Studebaker's] legacy is not going to be easy, says Pete Buttigieg, mayor of South Bend, Ind., and it's not going to be obvious., Getting past [Studebaker's] legacy is not going to be easy, says Pete Buttigieg, mayor of South Bend, Ind., and it's not going to be obvious., There are some parts of town where you'd think the closure of Studebaker was something that happened a couple of years ago, not 50, he says., A Harvard graduate and a Rhodes scholar, Buttigieg is 30 years old, but could easily pass for 17. He's also the first South Bend mayor born after Studebaker closed., A 'Dying City', South Bend is like so many towns in the Midwest: If you look around you can see traces of their former glory., Near downtown, there's a Catholic church less than a block from another Catholic church one for the Irish and another for the Poles. Sturdy, low slung houses line the streets, and there's a tavern on almost every corner., For many years the leaders of the town had anything but a vision for South Bend's future. The city lost about one-third of its population in the years after Studebaker. Last year, Newsweek put it on its list of America's Dying Cities., The town spent years trying to figure what to do and how to get another Studebaker-type company to fill the hole. Meanwhile, old factory buildings took up blocks and blocks of real estate as a constant reminder of what the town had lost., An Edge In The Data Economy, In recent years, some of Studebaker's former assembly plants have been torn down, and one former site on the company's old grounds has been renamed Ignition Park. It's currently an empty lot that Buttigieg hopes will transform into a business park for high-tech manufacturing. For now, Ignition Park's first confirmed tenant is a data center., Buttigieg says all the railroads and other infrastructure left over from Studebaker gives South Bend an edge over other wannabe tech cities., Believe it or not, being a very cold place in the middle of the country next to some old rail lines is very beneficial in the data economy, just as it was in the car economy, he explains. He says South Bend's mild climate can help with cooling off data centers. The city also has advantages with its relatively cheap utility costs and close proximity to fiber optic lines that run along old highway and railway right-of-ways., Nick Easley, director of strategic initiatives for Union Station Technology Center, stands inside the former Studebaker plant. The center hopes to expand its business into the old building., Nick Easley, director of strategic initiatives for Union Station Technology Center, stands inside the former Studebaker plant. The center hopes to expand its business into the old building., Selling South Bend And Notre Dame, Under Buttigieg's predecessor, the city paid for the demolition of the factory buildings with a mix of bonds and federal money for cleaning up toxic waste sites. City leaders hope businesses will spin off from research at the University of Notre Dame and end up in Ignition Park and other new business parks. So far, the university, which for decades hasn't been very engaged in the life of the city, has gotten involved., One of the things that's changed in South Bend is the city's relationship to the Fighting Irish. The town-and-gown tension that's common in so many college towns was especially evident in South Bend. In the last decade, that's begun to change., The leaders of Notre Dame, the city's largest employer, have made a commitment to the town. John Affleck-Graves, who became Notre Dame's executive vice president in 2004, says the school is committed to the health and success of South Bend. What's good for South Bend is good for Notre Dame, he says., Mayor Buttigieg says the changes in town wouldn't be possible without the support of the school. He says Notre Dame realized it's not just competing with other universities but also other university towns. You've got these academic rock stars. They could live anywhere they want to in the world. And if the university wants them to come here, they're not just selling Notre Dame, they're selling South Bend, Buttigieg says., From Rail Station To Tech Center, South Bend's old railroad station has also been re-purposed to join the data economy. Now known as the Union Station Technology Center, the building houses tech companies, as well as Notre Dame's computers., Nick Easley, director of strategic initiatives for the center, says it would surprise most South Bend residents that technology has taken over the town landmark., When people [in South Bend] say Union Station, it's where they held their prom, Easley says. It has nothing to do with this sleepy multimillion-dollar business under the building., The building's owner, Kevin Smith, hopes to eventually expand into the old Studebaker headquarters next door. He says there's no reason that South Bend cannot bring outsourced jobs to town. Smith recently set up a network for Notre Dame researchers to receive data from the CERN laboratory in Geneva and do analysis in South Bend., This just shows how the world has just collapsed, he says., Recovering From An Economic Disaster, Buttigieg says he understands that the economic equivalent of a tornado went through his town and that he has to treat what happened to South Bend like the disaster it was., You look at some of these buildings, and it literally looks like a bomb went off or like a natural disaster happened, he says. Getting past that legacy is not going to be easy, and it's not going to be obvious., The mayor of South Bend says the good thing is that the worst that could've happened to South Bend already happened 50 years ago.
Countrywide Financial Corp., the one-time mortgage giant, may have skirted the federal bribery statute, but nonetheless used a VIP discount program to gain influence in Washington, a report from the Republican-led House Oversight and Government Reform Committee concludes., We first posted on this news, broken earlier by The Associated Press and The Wall Street Journal, at 9 a.m. ET. Since then, the committee's report has been released. Read through to see our original post and the update with links and excerpts from the committee's work:, Our original post., Today's scoop from The Associated Press:, The former Countrywide Financial Corp., whose subprime loans helped start the nation's foreclosure crisis, made hundreds of discount loans to buy influence with members of Congress, congressional staff, top government officials and executives of troubled mortgage giant Fannie Mae, according to a House report., The Wall Street Journal has a piece of the story as well:, A controversial program at Countrywide Financial Corp., offering loans to 'VIPs' on favorable terms, spread to Congress in part because congressional staffers complained about their Countrywide mortgages to the company's lobbyist, according to a new report by a House committee., The Journal adds that the findings are part of a final report on the VIP program issued by the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee, headed by Rep. Darrell Issa (R., Calif.). ... The House report, expected to be released publicly Thursday, said the VIP program was used to 'build goodwill with lawmakers and other individuals positioned to benefit the company.' , The AP says Democrats and Republicans are among those cited in the report as having received the discounts in recent years., The House committee's website is here. We'll update after the report appears., Update at 10:30 a.m. ET. The Report Is Out. Did Countrywide Skirt The Law?, In a statement now posted on his committee's website, Issa says the committe's investigation found Countrywide lobbyists and CEO Angelo Mozilo used discounted loans as a tool to ingratiate itself with policymakers in an effort to benefit the company's business interests., The report goes on to state that Countrywide, which has since by absorbed by Bank of America, may not have broken any laws because it may have skirted the federal bribery statute:, According to 18 U.S.C. 201(b), 'whoever directly or indirectly, corruptly gives, offers or promises anything of value to any public official . . . with intent to influence an official act' shall be fined, imprisoned, or both. The Justice Department has not prosecuted any Countrywide official for actions related to the VIP loan program. Documents and testimony show that Angelo Mozilo and Countrywide's lobbyists may have skirted the federal bribery statute by keeping conversations about discounts and other forms of preferential treatment internal. Rather than making quid pro quo arrangements with lawmakers and staff, Countrywide used the VIP loan program to cast a wide net of influence., Mozilo, as the committee adds, responded to its questions in writing. He said he did not recall discussing the VIP loan program with any lawmakers who took advantage of it. Also, he wrote that it was not the purpose of the VIP program to establish relationships with borrowers who had the potential to influence policy, law and public image. I did believe that high-profile borrowers could enhance the company's public image., In another response, Mozilo says he was proud to have people of prominence select Countrywide to be their lender of choice., Today's report also notes that in March 2009, committee Republicans (then in the minority) issued a report describing:, Countrywide's effort to establish and develop relationships with potentially influential borrowers in government and industry. Of the 32 people named in the report, 16 had not been previously reported. They included industry lobbyists, law enforcement officials, and employees of Fannie Mae, the Mortgage Bankers Association, and the Los Angeles Times., The report also thoroughly examined the loans given to the politically influential borrowers previously reported by Portfolio and other media outlets. In addition to [former Fannie Mae Chairman Franklin] Raines, this group contained notable Democrats such as Chris Dodd, Kent Conrad, and Richard Holbrooke. The report also examined the VIP loans given to Republicans John Potter, Alphonso Jackson, and California State Appellate Judge Richard Aldrich.
There were 176,000 jobs added to private employers' payrolls in June, according to the latest ADP National Employment Report. The gain was larger than May's 136,000, ADP says., That report, based on surveys of employers, is sometimes a preview of what the Bureau of Labor Statistics will say in its monthly employment report. The bureau's look at employment and unemployment in June is due Friday at 8:30 a.m. ET. In May, the jobless rate was 8.2 percent., Joel Prakken, chairman of Macroecnomic Advisers (which produces the report for ADP) says in today's release that:, The gain in private employment is strong enough to suggest that the national unemployment rate may have declined in June. Today's estimate, if reinforced by a comparable reading on employment from the Bureau of Labor Statistics tomorrow, likely will ease concerns that the economy is heading into a downturn., We'll hear from the Employment and Training Administration this hour about last week's first-time claims for jobless benefits. When that number is released, we'll update this post., Update at 8:40 a.m. ET. Layoffs At 13-Month Low:, Planned layoffs fell to a 13-month low in June, as U.S.-based employers announced job cuts totaling 37,551 during the month, according to the outplacement firm Challenger, Gray &amp; Christmas. It says that is down 39 percent from the 61,887 announced job cuts in May., Update at 8:32 a.m. ET. Jobless Claims Fell By 14,000:, There were 374,000 first-time claims for unemployment insurance in the week ended June 30, down 14,000 from the previous week, ETA says. At 374,000, claims were the lowest since mid-May., But ETA also revised up slightly its estimate of claims for the week ended June 23 to 388,000 from the initial estimate of 386,000.
The U.S. Supreme Court, 70 years after rejecting Roscoe Filburn's bid to limit the federal government's power to regulate commerce., The U.S. Supreme Court, 70 years after rejecting Roscoe Filburn's bid to limit the federal government's power to regulate commerce., Last week's Supreme Court ruling on the health care law might have made Roscoe Filburn a little happier., Filburn was an Ohio dairy farmer who had a beef with the federal government, one he took to the U.S. Supreme Court in 1942. He lost., The dispute was simple: The federal government said Filburn had grown too much wheat. In an effort to keep the price of wheat from falling this was just after the Great Depression the government limited how much wheat farmers could grow under a 1938 law, invoking its constitutional power to regulate interstate trade., The government said Filburn could grow 11 acres. The farmer went out and planted twice that much., Yes, he figured, he grew wheat. But he just fed it to his chickens. He didn't sell any of it across state lines. He didn't sell it at all. It never left his farm., Jim Chen, dean of the University of Louisville School of Law, says you can understand Filburn's point of view. I'm a chicken guy! Chen says. I'm a fourth- or fifth-generation farmer. You are bunch of pointy-headed economic idiots with economic charts and equations in Washington, D.C. And you know nothing about what it means to grow wheat. You can go to hell., The feds tried to fine Filburn, and he fought all the way to the Supreme Court. It would turn out to be one of the most influential cases in history., That's because the court ruled that the government could limit how much wheat Filburn, and other farmers, could grow. It could fine them for growing too much. Filburn may not have bought or sold any wheat, but he still affected the wheat market: Every extra bushel he grew was a bushel he didn't buy. In some small way, that moved the price of wheat., And here's the parallel to the health care case: Roscoe Filburn didn't buy or sell wheat, yet the Commerce Clause still applied. What about people who didn't buy health insurance? Could it be applied there?, The Supreme Court last week said no, it didn't apply. Americans can be required to buy health insurance, just not under the Commerce Clause. Chief Justice Roberts argued that there's a difference between activity and inactivity. Filburn was actively growing wheat. But people not buying health insurance, aren't doing anything. (The court invoked the government's taxing authority to uphold the health-care requirement instead.), Filburn died in 1987. His grandson, Gerald Spurgeon, said he didn't even know his grandfather had been part of a monumental Supreme Court case until after he died. He never talked about it, Spurgeon says. No, he wasn't talkative. ... He was a farmer.
Susan Underwood prices fireworks, while her husband Michael (left) and Clint Simmons pace themselves with a snack and TV last month at their tent along Highway 416 in Sevier County, Tenn. Over in Middle Tennessee, the drought has led city leaders to ban fireworks this year., Freddie Bowers and his dad, Larry, have sold fireworks in LaVergne, Tenn., for a lifetime. But, the sparklers are off limits this year since the region has had the hottest streak in recorded history and several small fires in the area have been blamed on fireworks., For people in the fireworks business, Christmas usually comes in July. Only this year, three-quarters of the country are experiencing some level of drought and from the Mountain West to the Southeast, cities are temporarily banning fireworks., Good luck, however, keeping the Bowers admitted pyros out of their stash. They're not going to ban Christmas, Freddie says. They're not going to ban Fourth of July. Larry is prepared to pay a price for the rush of lighting a fuse., I do it because it's my Independence Day, he says. And whether I shoot one firework or 10, I don't want to break that tradition. I'm not going to. They're just going to have to fine me if they catch me., In many cities where fireworks are already illegal, enforcement is practically nonexistent. Police in Nashville handed out just one citation last year. But now, there's a no tolerance policy. Temporary bans are in place in more than a dozen nearby cities, like Murfreesboro. Assistant City Attorney David Ives says it was too late to revoke permits purchased by vendors, so people can still buy fireworks. But they cannot use them and actually will not be able to use them until the New Year season, Ives says. And though it may seem silly to think people are buying fireworks and holding them until Christmas, Ives says city leaders did what they needed to do to protect the community. Some municipalities have even postponed public fireworks displays, including Terre Haute, Ind., and several communities near Lansing, Mich. Major cities such as Louisville and Indianapolis have pulled the plug on backyard fireworks for this year. That's expected to result in a drop off in sales, which industry-wide approached $1 billion in 2011. It's putting the pinch on guys like Kent Goolsby, who works on commission and sleeps at his tent to protect the stock. Goolsby has what was a prime location before the local ban. Being right here, there's almost no reason for people to come here if you can't shoot 'em, he says. Back at the Bowers' tent, customers are at a trickle. Some people, such as university student Elsie Bennett, are trying to be good citizens. I'm having a little party, so I figure we better just stick with sparklers and fountains and color bombs, and that's about it, she says. I wish we could do something crazy, but that's about it. But others don't seem too concerned about getting caught with contraband. Steven McShand says his wife will keep the water hose handy. I don't see nothing wrong with letting kids enjoy the things we've passed down with generations, says McShand, who has a young son, Justin. I always enjoyed popping fireworks with my parents. Ban or not, McShand says he and Justin will share the magic of lighting that first fuse together.
Ginger, an English bulldog, comes to work each day with Will Pisnieski. She's one of several dogs who are regular fixtures at dog-friendly Authentic Entertainment in Burbank, Calif., Ginger, an English bulldog, comes to work each day with Will Pisnieski. She's one of several dogs who are regular fixtures at dog-friendly Authentic Entertainment in Burbank, Calif., Most dog lovers will insist a canine friend makes for a happier home. A number of studies back that up, too, touting the health benefits of four-legged companions., But there's new evidence that dogs can make for a better workplace as well, making employees happier and more productive., On a recent afternoon at Los Angeles-based RSA Films, Harrison, one of the company's newer additions, greets a visitor at the door. Sizing up the newcomer, he turns, as if inviting her to follow him down the hall to executive producer Tracie Norfleet's office., Happy Dogs, Happy Workers, Harrison all long legs and butterfly ears has joined Ziggy, a bichon frise mix, and Ippo, a large shaggy blonde with a yellow bow, around Norfleet's desk., This is sort of the headquarters here, because ... this is where all the treats are stashed, Norfleet says., About a dozen dogs accompany their owners to RSA each day. Like many of his canine colleagues, Chuck, Leah Carnahan's corgi mix, lazes at his owner's feet as she goes about her work., Chuck may be relaxed, but he's helping Carnahan be relaxed, too., Tank relaxes in the lobby of RSA Films in Los Angeles. About a dozen dogs accompany their owners to the RSA office each day., Tank relaxes in the lobby of RSA Films in Los Angeles. About a dozen dogs accompany their owners to the RSA office each day., In the middle of a crazy day, I just look at his face, and it calms me right down, Carnahan says., Lowering stress is just one of the positive benefits of dogs in the workplace, according to a recently published study from Virginia Commonwealth University., Study co-author Sandra Barker says dogs also make for a more satisfying work experience., The vast majority of employees listed positive things about the dogs: that they reduced stress, that they made them feel more comfortable [and] they contributed to their communication, Barker says., An estimated 17 percent of businesses are dog-friendly, including corporate giants like Google and Amazon, according to a survey by the American Pet Products Association., At Authentic Entertainment in Burbank, Calif., co-owner Tom Rogan says his staff of more than 100 employees considers having dogs at work a fringe benefit., I think that translates into how people approach their jobs, Rogan says. If they're happier in the workplace and that's contributing to it, then they are becoming more productive., Several desks at Authentic have dog beds and a scattering of dog toys underneath them. A pooch occasionally peeks out from around a corner, while others quietly stroll the vast office, occasionally stopping to nudge a knee., Joey Atkinson sits hunched toward his computer, while Karma, a floppy-eared rescue dog, sits by his side., When you get stressed out and you have those kind of moments where you need something to lean on, it's great to have your dog right there, Atkinson says., Keep Those Snacks Under Wraps, Of course, not all dogs are suited for the office, experts say. Nor is everyone always agreeable to having four-legged co-workers around., The Humane Society of the United States recommends that companies' pet policies stipulate that dogs be in good health, are spayed or neutered and perhaps most importantly have good manners., Norfleet admits employees need to be vigilant about leaving stray sandwiches on a desk., As for conference calls? Norfleet says the dogs can sometimes throw folks on the other end of the line. It's a little disconcerting to other people who work in offices around the world. [They'll ask] 'Who's dog is that? Are you at home?' , But most RSA staffers maintain the benefits outweigh the occasional disruption even employees like Elicia Laport, who doesn't own a dog herself., You just can't take things too seriously when you're surrounded by all these dogs, Laport says., Danielle Krause says her dog Ziggy loves his office routine, and perhaps unlike his human colleagues hates weekends., He knows Saturdays we're not going to work, so he sleeps in. Sundays he sleeps in. But Mondays, he's by the door, waiting to go, Krause says., Suddenly, a commotion pops up over a squeaky toy, and then, a calm and smiling golden lab named Tank pleasantly sees a departing visitor to the door.
Revelations that Barclays traders were involved in efforts to manipulate a key interest rate claimed the job of Barclays Chief Executive Bob Diamond., Revelations that Barclays traders were involved in efforts to manipulate a key interest rate claimed the job of Barclays Chief Executive Bob Diamond., There's a certain amount of trust underpinning the financial markets. But recent news out of the United Kingdom has shaken the world's faith in a key element of the system., That element is the number banks use to determine how much to charge their customers think of it as the measuring stick that determines nearly every other other interest rate around: mortgages, credit cards, corporate loans, complex derivatives transactions. It's called LIBOR, or the London Interbank Offered Rate, and it pretty much underpins everything., For years, Thomson Reuters has calculated the rate on behalf of the British Bankers Association by asking big banks what they are paying to borrow from other banks. The answers were largely taken on faith. Now it turns out that at least one big bank Barclays was skewing the numbers, during the financial crisis and before. Emails cited in a regulatory complaint against the bank show the casual way the efforts were discussed. Other banks are under investigation as well., The result: Criminal and parliamentary inquiries on two continents, lawsuits, and a lot of mistrust and uncertainty about interest rates across the financial markets., On today's show, we look at how Barclays bankers sought to manipulate Libor, and why the repercussions will be felt throughout the global financial system for years to come., Music: OK Go's White Knuckles and Ivan &amp; Alyosha's Beautiful Lie. Find us:Twitter/Facebook/ Spotify/ Tumblr.
A fallen tree crushes a truck in Falls Church, Va., outside Washington. Storms across the Midwest and East downed trees and power lines and left millions without power., A fallen tree crushes a truck in Falls Church, Va., outside Washington. Storms across the Midwest and East downed trees and power lines and left millions without power., Once major storms pass, hard-hit communities sometimes discover an unexpected silver lining: a miniature economic boom, as insurance checks pay for homeowners to rebuild and businesses to restock., Unfortunately, residents of the 650-mile long swath of the Midwest and Atlantic Seaboard raked by Friday's storms (or derecho) aren't likely to see a similar benefit. The reason lies in the nature of the storms, and the damage and inconvenience they left in their wake., It's conventional wisdom in the insurance business that major disasters are followed by frenetic rebuilding that can bolster the local economy. Insurance money flows in, first to pay living expenses for homeowners ousted by storm damage, and ultimately to pay for repairs, new homes, new inventory for businesses, and so on., It's hard to isolate recovery spending and employment from the many other economic influences, and ultimately, much of the activity after a storm amounts to replacing what's lost rather than the kind of real economic gains that are most desirable for a community. But unemployment data, at least, seem to support the idea of an uptick after the storm., The best known example is Hurricane Andrew, which devastated much of southern Florida in 1992 and led to more than $25 billion of insurance payouts in the state ($41 billion in 2012 dollars). In Miami-Dade County, unemployment spiked at first, to over 10 percent a recession had already pushed it nearly that high before the storm and then fell to about 8 percent, roughly where it was just before the recession. The effect was even more pronounced in nearby Broward County. (Figures are from a recent presentation by Miami-Dade's chief economist, Robert Cruz: PDF.) By contrast, overall U.S. unemployment inched down to 7.3 percent from 7.6 percent over the same three-month period., More recently, the deadly tornados that struck Joplin, Mo., last year caused about $2 billion of insured damage. Since then, unemployment has fallen faster than in the U.S. overall, to 6.2% in May, a year after the storm hit, from 7.2% the month before the storm. U.S. unemployment fell from 9 percent in April 2011 to 8.2 percent in May 2012. A similar pattern occurred in Tuscaloosa, Ala., which was hard-hit by tornados in April 2011., So why wouldn't the most recent storms yield similar recovery benefits? For one thing, the actual physical damage was more limited: There was little tornado activity, not much hail, and the storms moved quickly over a huge territory, without lingering like the worst hurricanes tend to., The result: Lots of people without power, and some relatively minor damage, but not the acres of destroyed buildings seen after tornados and major hurricanes. Most business and home insurance policies don't pay out for losing electricity, especially if there's no wind damage or other physical harm to the building., Although formal industry estimates aren't yet available, economist Robert Hartwig, president of the Insurance Information Institute trade group, says the storms may have done damage in the hundreds of millions of dollars. That's significant for the homeowners and businesses that get insurance payments, but spread over the storms' long trail, it isn't likely to provide much in the way of economic stimulus.
Striking workers picket outside a Caterpillar plant in Joliet, Ill. The work stoppage is now entering its third month., Striking workers picket outside a Caterpillar plant in Joliet, Ill. The work stoppage is now entering its third month., Whenever a car or truck turns off busy Channahon Road onto the long drive to the Caterpillar plant in Joliet, Ill., a handful of union workers on a picket line scream, Scab! Scab!!, As strikers try shaming the few workers and managers who cross the line, even a clearly marked sandwich delivery car gets shouted down., Approximately 800 workers at this plant, which makes hydraulic systems for Caterpillar's heavy construction and mining equipment, are about to enter their third month on strike., Negotiations Fail, These machinist union members rejected Caterpillar's offer earlier this year: a six-year contract that would freeze wages for most workers while sharply increasing health care costs and cutting pension benefits., Joe Ahern, on the negotiating committee for the Joliet Local 851 of the International Association of Machinists, says Caterpillar's offer really kinda was a sucker punch to me., Ahern says the company never truly negotiated with the workers. Through the negotiation process, he says, Caterpillar management rarely tried to find common ground., It was always, 'This is our last, best and final,' Ahern says. And it was sad that way., &ldquo; We don't see a lot of strikes by large bargaining units that go on for more than 24 hours. ... This is a throwback., - Robert Bruno, labor and employment relations professor, What Ahern finds particularly insulting, he says, is that Caterpillar earned record profits last year and is on pace to do so again., This company is a global leader, Ahern says. And I don't understand why they wouldn't want to see their employees paid that way ... or why they have to be below the bar on their wages and benefits., In an emailed statement, a Caterpillar spokesman says the company has offered what it believes is a fair, reasonable and comprehensive proposal, and that it has exhausted the negotiation process., Caterpillar is now trying to hire temporary replacement workers to keep the plant running., 'This Is A Throwback', Robert Bruno, a labor employment relations professor at the University of Illinois, says this strike is anomaly., We don't see a lot of strikes in general these days, Bruno says, much less ones by large bargaining units. And we don't see a lot of strikes by large bargaining units that go on for more than 24 hours, a couple of shifts, a week, he says., This is a throwback, Bruno says., During the 1970s and early 1980s, there were hundreds of strikes of more than 1,000 workers each year in the U.S., according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics., But in 2009 at the height of the recession there were only five., That number has ticked up to 19 strikes in 2011, but even so, unions have largely lost their punch, Bruno says., Clearly, labor has its back up against the wall in the private sector as well as the public sector, he says. And the fights in the public sector particularly those in the Midwest have had an impact on the state of mind of lots of union workers., Holding Fast, Despite The Financial Hit, Caterpillar has a history of using hardball tactics against its unions. The company wore down its largest union, the United Auto Workers, during a long and bitter strike in the 1990s. The workers eventually were forced to take deep concessions., And earlier this year, Caterpillar closed a plant in London, Ontario, when the union there balked at pay cuts., But the standoff in Joliet appears to be a rare case, Bruno says. Union workers, who have already made significant concessions, feel they have little more to lose by drawing a line in the sand., But the work stoppage comes at a cost, and the workers are hurting. Most are earning only $150 a week in strike pay., No new negotiations are currently scheduled in Joliet, although the union says it's ready to negotiate at any time. For now, the workers insist that this strike is part of a larger struggle for workers: fighting for the right to earn wages that will keep them in the middle class.
Deacon Mark Coudrain, bottom left, Rev. Charles Benoit, top left, Abbot Justin Brown, top right, and attorney Evans Schmidt carry a casket built by Benedictine monks down the steps of the U.S. federal district courthouse on Aug. 12, 2010., Deacon Mark Coudrain, bottom left, Rev. Charles Benoit, top left, Abbot Justin Brown, top right, and attorney Evans Schmidt carry a casket built by Benedictine monks down the steps of the U.S. federal district courthouse on Aug. 12, 2010., Monks set up St. Joseph Abbey in Louisiana more than 100 years ago. They've been there so long, they have 1,100 acres and their own town, St. Benedict., For all those years, when one of the brothers died, the monks would painstakingly craft a flawless pine casket in their woodwork shop., Over the years, many clergy members and high-ranking church officials would request the the beautiful caskets. Soon, members of the public wanted see if they might be able to buy one., &ldquo; You could go online right now to Wal-Mart and buy a casket, and it's perfectly legal, but we couldn't sell them to our own next door neighbor., - Deacon Mark Coudrain, St. Joseph Abbey, So Deacon Mark Coudrain brought the idea to the abbot and asked if they'd consider making the caskets to sell. They did, and in 2007 the monks opened a 5,000-square-foot woodshop in the abbey, which Coudrain now runs. All the money from the caskets would go to support the abbey and charitable causes., Everyone seemed happy, but before they could sell a single casket the abbot called Courdrain with bad news., [He] said, 'You better sit down, I got a letter and it says we need to stop making them because it's illegal in Louisiana,' Coudrain tells weekends on All Things Considered guest host Laura Sullivan., The reason: You have to have a funeral home license in Louisiana to sell caskets to residents in the state., We can certainly make them, and we can sell them to anybody in the world except other residents of Louisiana, Coudrain says., Louisiana's law is just one of dozens of antiquated and possibly monopolistic laws that pervade the nation's funeral industry. For the first time in decades, the laws are facing new scrutiny as consumers become more aware of their rights and even funeral homes want to change., Inconsistent Rules, It's hard to know just how many other states only allow funeral homes to sell caskets to state residents because there's little federal law or oversight that regulates the industry. It varies by state, and sometimes it varies depending on how politically powerful each state's funeral homes are., Many state regulations are regulations lobbied for by the funeral homes and some of them can be anti-competitive, says Craig Tregillus, the funeral rule coordinator at the Federal Trade Commission., Tregillus' job is to ensure federal funeral regulations are followed. If you're worried that's a lot to keep track of, don't be. There's only one regulation on the books from 1984., The FTC's funeral rule took effect ... in order to give anyone who arranges a funeral the right to purchase only the funeral goods and services they wanted or needed, Tregillus tells Sullivan., Tregillus and FTC inspectors have conducted about 2,500 sting operations on funeral homes in the past 15 years just on this one rule making sure customers get a list at the door and only pay for what they want., Take caskets, for example, you don't even need to buy one. Each cemetery can make its own rules but there's no law that says you have to use one. There are laws in some states, however, that you can't drink coffee at a funeral home., It's the kind of thing that drives Paul Elvig, the state liaison for the International Cemetery, Cremation and Funeral Association, crazy., Going state-to-state to compare various laws that cover funeral homes and cemeteries, Elvig, a former regulator from Washington state, tells Sullivan that he found few similarities between what each state had on the books., They're highly unique state to state, Elvig says. If you look at insurance laws or laws governing real estate, they're very similar ... many times with the same wording. You're not going to find that similarity with funeral and cemetery laws., As the funeral industry marketplace changes, Elvig says the main point of contention is how much control the consumer should have., Should you be able to buy cremation and [not] have to deal with a funeral home? he says. What about the cemetery [and its role]? I see divisions in the industry on which way to go., Rules For All, While Elvig might want to see more uniformity in state regulations, other industry groups aren't necessarily on the same page., Patrick Lynch, a funeral home operator in Michigan and past president of the National Funeral Directors Association, says states should make their own rules., Lynch says everyone who sells funeral-related services should have to follow those rules: from the guy on the Internet selling graveside services to a business that provides cremation or even big-box stores like Walmart that sell caskets., Lynch says this is not about profit; it's about protecting the consumer., Not allowing food in funeral homes or not allowing the free marketplace of product sales, those are very isolated incidents, Lynch says. The greater one, where I believe the federal government needs to take a position, is to say we need consumer protection across the board, not to protect the arena of funeral homes but to protect the consuming public., For some people though, the rules and regulations aren't even relevant. There are some families in the U.S. that are turning to what are called home funerals., In 1995, Elizabeth Knox's daughter was killed in a car crash. At the hospital, in despair, she couldn't accept the idea of sending her daughter's body off to a funeral home. A friend told her she should bring her daughter home and let relatives come say goodbye so that's what she did., Knox dressed her daughter and had a viewing in her home to let family and friends say goodbye for three days. She then opted for cremation and said the process felt like closure and maybe a little bit like healing., That just would not have been possible in a funeral home, Knox says. At best we would have had two hours with her in a public place that was not our home., Benedictine Brother Brian Harrington (left) and novice Dustin Bernard pull a casket handle from a press in a workshop at St. Joseph Abbey in Covington, La., Benedictine Brother Brian Harrington (left) and novice Dustin Bernard pull a casket handle from a press in a workshop at St. Joseph Abbey in Covington, La., Knox now works in Maryland with other families to show them how to have their own home funeral. Many opt for cremation, but she says it's not hard to find cemeteries that don't require bodies to be embalmed., 'It's Just A Box', For the monks of St. Joseph Abbey and Coudrain, Louisiana's law was a difficult crossroads. Coudrain says the monks didn't want to hurt funeral homes' business, which the decades-old law seemed designed to protect, but they believed in the service they wanted to provide., You could go online right now to Walmart and buy a casket, and it's perfectly legal, but we couldn't sell them to our own next door neighbor, he says., Typically, monasteries don't want to be in the public eye, Coudrain says, but he and the monks decided they wanted to fight the law and see what they could do to make it legal for them to sell their caskets., So, they fought and won with a federal judge striking down the law. But the funeral home industry in Louisiana has appealed and the 5th Circuit Court will rule on the law in coming months., In the meantime, the monks are selling their caskets., We feel like it was our right to do this, we're not harming anyone [and] there was no health and safety issue, he says. We're building a box. I mean, yes, it's holding the temple of the Lord, but it's a box.
From the maple sugar moose heads of New England to the chile brittle of the Southwest, from the Almond Roca of the Pacific Northwest to the key lime coconut patties of Florida, America loves its candy., Coast to coast, folks fawn over national favorites. The top three selling candies in this country, according to Bloomberg/Business Week, are Hershey bars, Reese's Peanut Butter Cups and M&M;'s which together rake in more than $1.5 billion in annual sales., But Americans also rally around regional confections. A man from Minnesota might go gaga for the Nut Goodie. A sweet-toothed Texan may choose a Chewie Pecan Praline. A Wisconsin woman is liable to get all mushy over the chocolate milkiness of a Melty Bar., We're taking a cross-country tour of candies from around the U.S., sampling hometown sweets that deliver a nostalgic sugar rush., We rally around our regional candies, maybe because they take us back to a simpler, sweeter time., The family-owned Russel Sifers Candy Company has been making Valomilks, and only Valomilks, for decades., view series, With the noticeable rise of the local food movement, says Beth Kimmerle, author of Candy: The Sweet History, people are really interested in looking at our heritage candies again., And like other aspects of homegrown cuisine, those candies often reflect the tastes and sensibilities of certain parts of the country., By choosing wisely from an assorted sampler of goodies, you can take a historical and cultural spin around the U.S.A. and discover one reason it's called the sweet land of liberty., Nuts, Spuds And Mash, Despite global competition, pressure to consolidate and a sour economy, down-home confectioners keep cranking out candy. Some examples:, &mdash; One hundred years ago, in 1912, Pearson's of Minneapolis began making Nut Goodie bars milk chocolate-covered rounds, pocked with unsalted peanuts and filled with a soft maple center. Nowadays the straightforward delicacy still evokes Minnesota niceness and, well, nut goodieness., &mdash; The Idaho Candy Co. started selling its signature Idaho Spud Bar in 1918. Today, the Boise-based company brags that the Spud is one of the top hundred selling candy bars in the Northwest. Open up the package of an Idaho Spud and you'll find an oblate spheroid that sort of reminds you of a loaded, baked Idaho potato. Instead of a skin, the outside is dark chocolate. Instead of mushy innards, the inside is creamy, cocoa-flavored marshmallow. The whole thing is dusted all over not with cheddar cheese, chives and bacon bits, but grated coconut., &mdash; Also in 1918, Chase Candy Co. in St. Joseph, Mo., developed Cherry Mash, a lump of cherry-flavored fondant coated with chocolate and peanuts. It bears a slight resemblance to a perfectly grilled Kansas City steak: brown on the outside and pinkish in the middle. Similar to the bourbon-laced bonbon of Kentucky, Cherry Mash may sound alcoholic, but it's a safe bet for teetotalers., Everywhere you turn in America, from Chocolate Charlies in Indiana to pralines in Louisiana to Red Coconut Balls in Hawaii, nearly every nook and cranny of the country has its own gooey, sui generis candy creation., Bite into a local delicacy and you just might get a mouthful of regional pride., Russell Sifers' family has fashioned the Valomilk a round chocolate candy with an egg-white marshmallow interior for decades out of Merriam, Kan., I once did a presentation to Bloomingdale's in 1988, when they were going to feature Kansas products in their stores, he says. The buyer at Bloomingdale's said they were used to fancier candy, to which I replied, 'I guess we are just sodbusters here in Kansas, because chocolate and marshmallow is about as fancy as we get.' , Secrets Of The Sweet-Makers, Marshmallow and nougat are recurring ingredients in many American candies. There are good reasons for this, says Kimmerle, who also teaches at the Institute of Culinary Education., Both are candies that are relatively inexpensive to make, she explains you just mix eggs and sugar. The cheaper fillings stretch the pricier commodities such as chocolate and nuts., Frothy centers, she says, have height and loft making for a bigger candy, thereby offering a perception of greater value., Mars, a multinational corporation founded as a candy company in 1911, eventually introduced nougat-filled bars such as the Milky Way and 3 Musketeers, which made their candy bars look so much bigger than a thin Hershey bar, Kimmerle says. Marshmallow is also fairly stable in the heat; it won't melt like a solid bar of chocolate would., Vintage advertising for GooGoo Clusters promote the candy as a nourishing lunch., United Tastes Of America, Survey sugary treats from all over the country, and you'll discover that although many candies from different regions contain the same ingredients, they somehow remain distinctive., For example, the Nut Goodie, a chocolate and peanut bar from Minnesota, has a maple center. On the other hand, a chocolate and peanut bar from Tennessee the GooGoo Cluster contains caramel and marshmallow nougat. San Francisco's Rocky Road version marries a marshmallow core with a coating of chocolate and cashews. Each one represents in look and taste its own regionalism., You might also notice that many of America's more famous candy-crafting companies were founded around the same time, in the early 20th century. At that moment in American history, Kimmerle says, there was a real candy bar boom thanks to the passage of the 1906 Pure Foods and Drugs Act., The act prevented the manufacture, sale or transportation of deleterious foods and drugs in the United States. Consumers felt candies were safe, Kimmerle says., The popularity of candy in America was also propelled by Prohibition. The sweet candy as well as 'soft' drinks and ice cream business boomed enormously during those dry times, Kimmerle says., And there was a treacle-down policy. Candy was marketed as a little luxury for the upper class, Kimmerle explains, and as a meal replacement for those who were less fortunate., America's affection for confections shows up again and again in our history, literature and popular culture. Here's a brief portrait of the American candylover:, Favorite Game: Candy Land, Favorite Songs: Big Rock Candy Mountain, Candy Man, Lollipop and Sugar Sugar., Favorite Poems: Cotton Candy On A Rainy Day by Nikki Giovanni (1978) and Xerox Candy Bar (1967) by Richard Brautigan, Favorite Movie: Bright Eyes (1934), in which Shirley Temple sings On the Good Ship Lollipop, Favorite TV Clip: From I Love Lucy (1952): Job Switching, Favorite Painting: The Candy Store, by Richard Estes, (1969). Whitney Museum of American Art, New York., &mdash; Linton Weeks, Candy Land, U.S.A., Nowadays, America's obsession with fitness and its expensive battle against obesity brings the country's long-standing love affair with candy into question., Still, candy-makers continue to make candy. The National Confectioners Association estimates that candy sales in 2010 amounted to $29.4 billion, up nearly 3 percent from 2009., Perhaps Americans continue to love candy for the same reasons they love caffeine, convertible cars and roller coasters: the immediate rush, that sweet surge of sugary energy, that jolt to the psyche that convinces us we can build cities, program supercomputers and explore the far reaches of outer space., Through the proliferation of Internet marketing and express shipping, some provincial candies are available now outside their provinces. And with the influx of people from all over the world, heritage candies from other countries such as goat's milk concoctions in the Southwest and manju in the Northwest have become part of the American Candy Sampler., But why do we go on reaching for regional candies? What is it about Washington state's Chukar Cherries, Kentucky's Modjeskas and New York's Sponge Candy that keeps us coming back for more?, Maybe it's because of our nation's fascination with youth and childhood. Or maybe it's because in a globalized world of mass-marketed tastes, particular sweets still trigger particular memories of particular places., If one grew up in the Midwest eating Valomilks, says Sifers, the candy-maker, then to taste them again after many years, it indeed would take you back to the Midwest. I hear that all the time., In other words, maybe no matter how old we are, or how jaded we become or how long we have been away from our home place, when we bite into candy from our childhood, we are bathed in memory and sensation and remembrance of things past. And of a slower, simpler and sweeter time.
Michelle Holshue racked up $140,000 in student loan debt while training to become a public health nurse. She's living her dream of helping others, she says, but never expected it to be so hard., Michelle Holshue racked up $140,000 in student loan debt while training to become a public health nurse. She's living her dream of helping others, she says, but never expected it to be so hard., Growing up near Philadelphia, Michelle Holshue's dream was to serve those in need. Applying to nursing school at the University of Pennsylvania seemed like a smart move in 2007., Nursing jobs were plentiful. The students' running joke was that hospital executives would soon be stopping them in the street, begging them to come to work., Then the economy tanked. For a time, Holshue was an Ivy League grad on unemployment and food stamps., But I made it work, Holshue recalls. I learned to cook really well on a tight budget, which is a skill that's served me ever since., Twenty Different Loans, Holshue has now found her footing. She's held several jobs and moved recently to take a one-year fellowship at a public health association in Washington, D.C. She now has her own apartment in Virginia, a one-hour commute from her job., At 30 years old, Holshue exemplifies a key tenet of the American dream: exceeding one's parents' education and income., Holshue religiously clips coupons to keep her expenses down. Even so, she often has to put groceries on her credit card., Holshue religiously clips coupons to keep her expenses down. Even so, she often has to put groceries on her credit card., My dad never finished high school, she says. So in that sense, I am doing better than my parents did., Holshue's father is a school bus driver, and her mother, a teacher. At this early stage in her career, Holshue is already making more money than her parents make after decades of working., Even so, all her credentials came at a cost. Holshue's student loans for her bachelor's and nursing degrees total $140,000., I think at last count there was something like 20 different loans, she says, paging through a thick binder of loan statements., Holshue says she's in debt more than her parents ever were when they bought their house. In fact, her monthly student loan payment of $1,100 is nearly as much as her rent., The first of the month, I might have $100 to live on for two weeks. Which doesn't even pay my transportation cost, Holshue says., It 'Isn't Supposed To Be So Hard', Holshue says she used to tease her father, calling him cheap for buying in bulk. Now, with a stack of coupons clipped to a refrigerator magnet and a closet full of toilet paper, she's following his example. Despite careful shopping, she says she often has to put food on a credit card., But even though she's just scraping by, Holshue says she's still living her dream. It's really hard, she says. Living the dream isn't supposed to be so hard., Cliff Zukin, a senior research fellow with the Heldrich Center for Workforce Development at Rutgers University, recently surveyed young adults who graduated from college between 2006 and 2011., Part of the American dream is that if you work hard, and you get an education and you apply yourself, you'll be successful, Zukin says., But today, says Zukin, one-third of college graduates say that adage doesn't hold true for them. , Young adults do report being slightly more positive about their own financial success, relative to their parents, Zukin says. But even so, he says, it's troubling that more than of half of survey respondents say they don't think they're going to be as successful as their parents were., Kids And Homeownership Seem Out Of Reach, Holshue says she expects to be paying off her student loans until 2034 when she'll be in her 50s. Like many who responded to the Rutgers survey, she does not see owning a home in the near future, if ever., And much to her mother's consternation, Holshue doesn't see how she'll be able to afford children., Still, she says she doesn't regret going to college, or her career choices., Even if I was a nurse working in a different specialty, I could definitely make a lot more money, Holshue says. But because I wanted to help those who need the most help, I think I've made a lot of sacrifices., And of course, she says, sacrifice is part of the American dream, too.
1 of 5, With the birth of the Interstate Highway System in the mid-1950s, America was on its way to becoming a nation of long-distance drivers., Add an emerging cattle industry, technological advances in truck refrigeration and the spread of meat packaging plants from major cities to rural areas, and you've got a recipe for getting more meat to more people. (See more meat facts in charts and graphs here.), Although outdoor advertising has been around since ancient Egypt, it really took off after the highway system was built. And advertisers thought, what better way to get to the captive audience in a car to pull over than to tempt them with giant pictures of meat?, Today, some billboards emit the distinctive odor of grilled meat, and there are billboards depicting the potential health effects of meat consumption. But here's a collection of billboards that helped fuel America's love affair with meat way back in the 20th Century.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel talks with European Central Bank President Mario Draghi (left) and Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti (right) during the summit of European leaders in Brussels., German Chancellor Angela Merkel talks with European Central Bank President Mario Draghi (left) and Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti (right) during the summit of European leaders in Brussels., European stocks rallied after policy makers eased repayment rules for Spanish banks, relaxed conditions for possible aid to Italy and unveiled a $149 billion growth plan for the region's economy, Bloomberg News reports this morning. U.S. index futures and Asian shares also rose., The Wall Street Journal sums up the reaction in the markets this way: Investors welcomed an agreement by euro-zone leaders for banks to receive aid directly from the region's permanent bailout fund, without adding to government debt., What's particularly pleasing to big investors is the part about not adding to government debt, says The Financial Times:, Eurozone leaders agreed to radically restructure Spain's [100 billion euros] bank recapitalization plan during all-night talks at an EU summit that ended in the early hours of Friday. The agreement will result in EU bailout funds eventually being injected directly into teetering Spanish financial institutions, meaning Madrid can sweep the burden of the bailouts off its sovereign books., That, in turn, should help keep a lid on the Spanish government's borrowing costs., While there have been many plans and packages in the recent past, The Associated Press writes from Brussels that after 18 disappointing summits, Europe's leaders appeared Friday to have finally come up with a set of short-term measures and long-term plans that show they are serious about solving their crippling debt crisis. The wire service adds that the scale of the moves were unexpected and provided investors a reason for optimism, even as analysts cast doubt on the plans' feasibility and noted that some fundamental problems with the common currency remain., Update at 4:24 p.m. ET. Dow Ends On A High Note: , The Dow climbed 277 points today. That's 2.2 percent. , Update at 10:15 a.m. ET. From Planet Money:, A Baby Step Toward A United States Of Europe., Update at 10 a.m. ET. U.S. Market Rallies Too:, About 30 minutes after the start of trading on Wall Street, the Dow Jones industrial average is up just over 200 points, or about 1.6 percent. Other indices are up by about the same percentage.
Supporters of President Obama's health care legislation celebrated outside after hearing that the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act., Supporters of President Obama's health care legislation celebrated outside after hearing that the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act., The Supreme Court ruled today that the 2010 Affordable Care Act is constitutional giving the Obama administration a big election year win over conservative critics who argue that the health care overhaul is a step on the way toward socialized medicine., Republican leaders immediately vowed to renew their efforts to repeal the controversial act. Presidential contender Mitt Romney said that while the court may have found the act constitutional, it didn't say that Obamacare is good law and good policy., What does the court's decision look like in a word cloud? It looks like this., What does the court's decision look like in a word cloud? It looks like this., Obamacare was bad policy yesterday, it's bad policy today, Romney said. Obamacare was bad law yesterday, it's bad law today., President Obama, meanwhile, said that debates over the political repercussions of the decision miss the point. He declared that today's decision was a victory for people all over this country whose lives will be more secure because of this law and the court's decision., The decision virtually ensures that the health care act will remain a huge topic of debate in the presidential campaign., In a 5-4 decision that was unusual because conservative Chief Justice John Roberts joined the court's four liberals and became the deciding vote, the justices ruled that the so-called individual mandate is a tax that Congress can impose on Americans. That undercut the challenge to that provision's constitutionality for allegedly violating the Commerce Clause., From there, upholding the mandate meant that the rest of the act was judged constitutional as well., We live blogged as the news developed and as key lawmakers reacted. We'll watch for more news of note as the day continues, but for more coverage you might also want to check NPR's Shots and It's All Politics blogs, as well as today's edition of All Things Considered. Click here to find an NPR station that broadcasts or streams the show., Our coverage:, Update at 12:20 p.m. ET. I Didn't Do This Because It's Good Politics, Obama Says., I respect the very real concerns that millions of Americans have shared about the act, the president just said. Then, he added that it should be pretty clear by now that I didn't do this because it's good politics. Instead, he said, the act was passed because it is good for the country ... good for the American people., Update at 12:17 p.m. ET. Obama Says It's A Victory For People All Over This Country:, Saying that debates over the political repercussions of the decision miss the point, President Obama just declared that today's decision was a victory for people all over this country whose lives will be more secure because of this law and the court's decision., Update at 12:05 p.m. ET. Roberts Avoided The Abyss:, On SCOTUSBlog, UCLA constitutional law professor Adam Winkler writes that:, With this deft ruling, Roberts avoided what was certain to be a cascade of criticism of the high court. No Supreme Court has struck down a president's signature piece of legislation in over 75 years. Had Obamacare been voided, it would have inevitably led to charges of aggressive judicial activism. Roberts peered over the abyss and decided he didn't want to go there., Richard Garnett, founding director of Notre Dame Law School's program in Church, State and Society, tells NPR's Liz Halloran that the decision confirms what Roberts told us during his confirmation hearings., He's a guy trying to find the right constitutional arguments, Garnett said. He's able to confirm his commitment to federalism, and to look really closely at a piece of federal legislation, regardless of the party that produced it, and see if it is constitutional. That's to be admired, no matter what you think of the decision., Update at 11:54 a.m. ET. Romney Says It's Important To Repeal Obamacare:, Calling the act a job killer that will have the federal government getting involved in choosing your doctor, Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney just renewed his call to repeal the act., The court, he said, ruled that the act is constitutional. But what the court did not say is that Obamacare is good law and good policy, Romney said. Obamacare is bad law and bad policy, he added., Update at 11:47 a.m. ET. On Medicaid:, The one part of the Affordable Care Act that was found unconstitutional was the sanction imposed on states if they fail to expand Medicaid to the poor., Essentially, the chief justice writes in the opinion, the federal government does have the ability to give states grants with strings attached. But in this case, the federal government was telling states that they had to expand Medicaid or lose funding for the whole program., Congress may offer the States grants and require the States to comply with accompanying conditions, but the States must have a genuine choice whether to accept the offer. The States are given no such choice in this case, Roberts writes., The court decided the expansion can proceed, but the sanction against states that decide not to take part is struck down., Update at 11:36 a.m. ET. Coverage On The Shots Blog:, Our colleagues on the Shots health blog are covering the decision here., Reminder: Not only will there be substantial coverage on All Things Considered, but NPR will be broadcasting and streaming special coverage at 7 p.m. ET. Click here to find an NPR member station., Update at 11:33 a.m. ET. Justice Ginsburg Would Have Upheld Mandate Regardless:, Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg agreed with the majority that the individual mandate was constitutional under Congress' taxing authority., But Ginsburg goes further, saying she would have upheld the individual mandate based on the Commerce Clause. She criticizes Roberts on his reading of the clause, which she called stunningly retrogressive., Here's a key paragraph from Ginsburg's concurring opinion:, The provision of health care is today a concern of naxadtional dimension, just as the provision of old-age and survivors' benefits was in the 1930's. In the Social Security Act, Congress installed a federal system to provide monthly benefits to retired wage earners and, eventually, to their survivors. Beyond question, Congress could have adopted a similar scheme for health care. Congress chose, instead, to preserve a central role for private insurers and state governments. According to the chief justice, the Commerce Clause does not permit that preservation. This rigid reading of the Clause makes scant sense and is stunningly retrogressive., Update at 11:27 a.m. ET. What The Dissenters Said:, Justices Antonin Scalia, Anthony Kennedy, Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito dissented from the majority., They aren't buying Roberts' argument that the individual mandate is also a tax: We cannot rewrite the statute to be what it is not. Although this court will often strain to construe legislation so as to save it against constitutional attack, it must not and will not carry this to the point of perverting the purpose of a statute ... or judicially rewriting it., And they agree with the other justices that the Commerce Clause simply didn't support the health care law. Citing a 1942 case, Wickard v. Filburn, the four justices note that government can regulate the economic activity of growing wheat, even for one's own consumption. But they're astonished that someone could be punished for failing to grow wheat or in this case for failing to purchase health insurance. That failure isn't an economic activity, or any activity at all. They warn that if the government can regulate the failure to act, this will make mere breathing in and out the basis for federal prescription., Update 11:20 a.m. ET. Romney, Then Obama To Speak:, Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney's campaign says he will be making a statement at 11:45 a.m. ET. The White House says President Obama will speak at 12:15 p.m. ET., Update at 11:17 a.m. ET. Roberts' Quest For Modesty:, The chief justice, NPR's Nina Totenberg just said on Morning Edition, has always wanted to be painted as modest in his judicial aspirations. This decision would seem to help him in that effort., Update at 11:15 a.m. ET. It Quacks Like A Tax., On Morning Edition a moment ago, NPR's Nina Totenberg summed up the court's thinking on why the individual mandate is a tax this way:, It looks like a tax, it walks like a tax, it quacks like a tax., Update at 11:10 a.m. ET. Why The Mandate Is A Tax:, In the majority opinion written by Chief Justice Roberts, he lays out his case for considering the penalty a tax., Under the mandate, if an individual does not maintain health insurance, the only consequence is that he must make an additional payment to the IRS when he pays his taxes, Roberts explains. That, according to the Government, means the mandate can be regarded as establishing a condition not owning health insurance that triggers a tax the required payment to the IRS. Under that theory, the mandate is not a legal command to buy insurance., Roberts admits that this may not be a natural reading of the mandate. But that doesn't matter, according to precedent., The question is not whether that is the most natural interpretation of the mandate, but only whether it is a 'fairly possible' one, Roberts writes., Roberts also makes the case that exactions not labeled taxes nonetheless were authorized by Congress's power to tax., In the License Tax Cases, for example, we held that federal licenses to sell liquor and lottery tickets for which the licensee had to pay a fee could be sustained as exercises of the taxing power, Robert writes., Update at 10:44 a.m. ET. What Others Are Saying:, &mdash; HEALTH LAW STANDS. (The New York Times), &mdash; Court Upholds Health Mandate As Tax. (The Wall Street Journal), &mdash; ObamaCare SURVIVES. (Fox News), Update at 10:40 a.m. ET. The Decision Itself:, Want to read the court's opinion? It's posted here., Update at 10:38 a.m. ET. Boehner Reacts, Renews Push For Repeal:, This tweet just showed up on House Speaker John Boehner's page. It's one of the first reactions from Republicans:, Today's ruling by the Supreme Court underscores the urgency of #fullrepeal of #ObamaCare j.mp/LFJTni #4jobs, Update at 10:33 a.m. ET. The Key Points In Plain English., From SCOTUSBlog:, In Plain English: The Affordable Care Act, including its individual mandate that virtually all Americans buy health insurance, is constitutional. There were not five votes to uphold it on the ground that Congress could use its power to regulate commerce between the states to require everyone to buy health insurance. However, five Justices agreed that the penalty that someone must pay if he refuses to buy insurance is a kind of tax that Congress can impose using its taxing power. That is all that matters., Because the mandate survives, the Court did not need to decide what other parts of the statute were constitutional, except for a provision that required states to comply with new eligibility requirements for Medicaid or risk losing their funding. On that question, the Court held that the provision is constitutional as long as states would only lose new funds if they didn't comply with the new requirements, rather than all of their funding., Update at 10:30 a.m. ET. Tax Issue Saved The Act:, On Morning Edition, NPR's Ari Shapiro just explained that the individual mandate was upheld as a tax., The Obama administration had argued that mandating that everyone in the country have insurance was constitutional under the Commerce Clause of the Constitution. That was the administration's A argument, as Ari explained. The B argument was that the individual mandate was constitutional under the federal government's ability to tax. During debate in Congress and in the law itself, the mandate is called a penalty. It was up to the Supreme Court to decide whether the penalty was indeed a tax., It appears, Ari said, that the tax argument is what saved President Obama's signature law., Update at 10:28 a.m. ET. Chief Justice Was The Deciding Vote:, According to SCOTUSBlog's Tom Goldstein, it was Chief Justice John Roberts who was the deciding vote on the key issue of whether the so-called individual mandate would survive. The vote was 5-4, says Goldstein, and Justice Anthony Kennedy sided with the conservatives while Roberts shifted to the liberal side., Update at 10:24 a.m. ET. The Lede:, The Supreme Court has upheld President Obama's signature health care law, NPR's Carrie Johnson writes. Chief Justice John Roberts says the individual mandate survives because the penalty it imposes for not having insurance is considered a tax., Also, NPR reports, on the issue of the Medicaid expansion, a majority of the court said Congress can expand Medicaid, but can't strip states of all their Medicaid funds if they fail to do the expansion., Update at 10:21 a.m. ET. Yes We Did!:, Supporters of President Obama broke out in chants of Yes We Did! outside the court building as word came that the law has been upheld., Update at 10:19 a.m. ET. The Money Quote:, According to SCOTUSBlog, the money quote from the section on the mandate is: 'Our precedent demonstrates that Congress had the power to impose the exaction in Section 5000A under the taxing power, and that Section 5000A need not be read to do more than impose a tax. This is sufficient to sustain it., Update at 10:14 a.m. ET. Entire ACA Is Upheld:, According to SCOTUSBlog, the bottom line [is that] the entire ACA [Affordable Care Act] is upheld, with the exception that the federal government's power to terminate states' Medicaid funds is narrowly read., Update at 10:10 a.m. ET. Individual Mandate Is Constitutional:, In a dramatic conclusion to the year's most divisive legal debate, SCOTUSBlog says the U.S. Supreme Court has just ruled that the so-called individual mandate in the 2010 Affordable Care Act is constitutional a decision that it's believed means the entire law passed by President Obama survives., Update at 10:07 a.m. ET. Health Care Opinion Being Released:, About 10 minutes earlier than expected, the health care opinion is now being released., Update at 10:02 a.m. ET. Stolen Valor Act Is Unconstitutional:, In the day's first decision, as SCOTUSBlog reports, the court affirms a Ninth Circuit decision that ruled the so-called Stolen Valor act is unconstitutional. The act made it a crime to lie about being the recipient of military medals. The justices voted 6-3 to affirm the lower court., Update at 10 a.m. ET. Court Is In Session:, The justices have come to the bench, according to reporters at the court., Update at 9:55 a.m. ET. On The Timing:, It's most likely, court watchers say, that the health care decision will be released around 10:15 a.m. ET. It will come after some less notable cases., Meanwhile, NPR's Arnie Seipel reports that outside the court building the sidewalks are packed. He reports the strangest sight so far has been a pair of belly dancers with a small band who support single-payer., Update at 9:50 a.m. ET. There Are Four Issues., As SCOTUSBlog's Lyle Denniston says, there are really four issues confronting the justices:, &mdash; Does the court have the authority to decide the constitutionality of the so-called individual mandate?, &mdash; If so, is that mandate constitutional?, &mdash; If the mandate isn't constitutional, do some or all parts of the act go down with it?, &mdash; Is the act's expansion of Medicaid constitutional?, SCOTUSBlog, by the way, is also live blogging., Our Original Post:, If everything goes as expected, sometime between 10 a.m. ET and 10:30 a.m. ET we should get word about the Supreme Court's most-anticipated decision of the year on the constitutionality of the Affordable Care Act; the health care overhaul enacted in 2010., Every U.S. news outlet, including NPR, has exhaustively previewed the decision, so we won't go over that ground yet again, except to point to the post we did Wednesday called Here's How To Learn What The Supreme Court Says About Health Care. It has background and links you may find useful., We'll use this post to cover the news as it comes in, so as decision time draws near be sure to hit your refresh button to see our latest updates., NPR's Ari Shapiro, Carrie Johnson and Nina Totenberg will be reporting on the NPR Newcast and Morning Edition once the decision is released, and on All Things Considered later in the day. At 7 p.m. ET, NPR will be broadcasting and streaming special coverage of the decision and what it means. Click here to find an NPR member station.
Two fresh bits of economic data, neither of which change the picture much if at all:, &mdash; The Employment and Training Administration says there were 386,000 first-time claims for unemployment insurance last week, down 6,000 from the week before. But it also revised up that previous week's estimate, from the initial report of 387,000., Basically, claims continue to come in at a pace that signals the labor market still isn't creating enough jobs to bring down the unemployment rate (which stood at 8.2 percent in May)., &mdash; The Bureau of Economic Analysis says gross domestic product grew at a sluggish 1.9 percent annual rate in the first quarter. That's unchanged from its previous estimate of first-quarter economic growth.
Rupert Murdoch, chairman and CEO of News Corp., with one of his company's British tabloids., Rupert Murdoch, chairman and CEO of News Corp., with one of his company's British tabloids., Saying that the move will create two companies, one a world-class publisher and the other an unmatched global media and entertainment giant, Rupert Murdoch's News Corp. just confirmed it is planning to separate into two distinct units., Murdoch, a legend in the news and entertainment businesses whose TV ventures include Fox News Channel, will serve as chairman of both companies and CEO of the media and entertainment company, the company added., As we reported Tuesday, News Corp. is responding to pressure from some investors who aren't interested in its relatively slow-growing publishing ventures, which include The Wall Street Journal and New York Post, newspapers in Australia and a collection of British tabloids that have been caught up in the so-called hacking scandal over in the U.K., All sorts of legal steps including getting the OK from shareholders and regulators still need to happen before the split occurs. News Corp. says the separation is expected to be completed in approximately 12 months.
JPMorgan Chase &amp; Co. headquarters in New York., JPMorgan Chase &amp; Co. headquarters in New York., First it was $2 billion., Then as high as $4 billion., Now there's word from The New York Times that:, Losses on JPMorgan Chase's bungled trade could total as much as $9 billion, far exceeding earlier public estimates, according to people who have been briefed on the situation., The total has grown, according to the Times, as the bank has been unwinding its positions., It says the bank declined to comment., As we reported last week, while he declined to tell Congress just how much the losses will end up being, JPMorgan CEO Jamie Dimon had a quip ready when asked if they might approach $1 trillion., Not unless this earth is hit by a moon, he said.
Meh., Here's a classic story of how a multimillion-dollar company gets started., A young guy named Seung Bak is on a trip to China. He gets back to his hotel room late one night and turns on the TV., I'm flipping through channels, and in the middle of China they are showing Korean dramas all around the clock, Bak says., It turns out Korean soap operas like, say, Bachelor's Vegetable Store, about a bunch of sexy guys selling organic produce are this global phenomenon., I went to a bachelor party in Cancun, and they are airing Korean dramas dubbed into Spanish, Bak says. And it hit him. He was going to start a website to bring all these crazy soap operas from around the world to Americans., In the classic startup story, Bak would would take his company public sell shares in an initial public offering, ring the bell at the stock exchange, have a big party. But Bak, like lots of young entrepreneurs these days, doesn't want Drama Fever to go public., Jai Shekhawat, the head of a company called Fieldglass, feels the same way. People don't really see it as a badge of honor anymore, he says. It's a hassle., Fieldglass is a high-tech firm that helps other companies find workers. He gets calls all the time from investment bankers telling him he should go public. But he says there are three big reasons he's not interested:, 1. Too many rules. Thanks to corporate scandals at places like Enron and WorldCom, there are a lot of new rules to protect shareholders. Companies that go public have to revamp the way they do their accounting. For a small firm, that can be a big burden., 2. Relentless pressure from shareholders. Investors demand constant growth, quarter after quarter after quarter. If you disappoint them too many times, you wind up at reason No. 3 not to go public., 3. You could wind up an orphan. A company becomes orphaned when institutional investors bolt, investment analysts stop following the company, and the stock plunges in value. It's a sad end to the IPO dream., There are, of course, plenty of companies that still do go public., Spencer Rascoff, who founded the real estate site Zillow, points to tech giants like Apple and Google. It would be impossible to accomplish what they wanted to accomplish if they had stayed private, he says., Rascoff took his company public last year. He says a lot of tech CEOs are like bachelors who swear they will never get married and then, when the time is right, they commit.
Defense contractor Lockheed Martin says it will be forced to send notices of possible layoffs to its entire workforce if proposed federal budget cuts go into effect., Defense contractor Lockheed Martin says it will be forced to send notices of possible layoffs to its entire workforce if proposed federal budget cuts go into effect., Just imagine the political fallout: Nov. 2, only days before the election, tens of thousands maybe hundreds of thousands of workers receive letters warning that they could be out of a job., That's exactly what some in the defense industry say will happen if Congress doesn't act soon to reverse sequestration the across-the-board spending cuts that take effect in January if Congress doesn't agree on a plan to cut the deficit., Those cuts are on track to hit just as the Bush-era tax cuts are set to expire at the end of the year a convergence many are calling a fiscal cliff., The budget cuts, part of the debt limit deal Congress struck last summer, were draconian by design, intended to prod congressional negotiators into devising a more balanced budget plan., But thus far, no such plan has emerged, and defense spending is one of the targets for sequestration., The WARN Act, I believe that everyone understood that sequestration was going to involve layoffs, says Marion Blakey, president and CEO of the Aerospace Industries Association, a defense industry trade group that has been lobbying heavily to get Congress to avert the cuts., But what I don't think anyone understood was the unintended consequence of early layoff notices, Blakey adds., The Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification Act, a federal law dating back to the 1980s, requires companies expecting massive layoffs to notify affected employees at least 60 days in advance., Defense contractor Lockheed Martin is the most prominent company to announce plans to issue early layoff notices this fall. Company executives say they may be forced to send these warnings to all 123,000 Lockheed employees, even though not all of those positions would actually be cut., Rep. Buck McKeon, R-Calif., chairman of the House Armed Services Committee, says he recently spoke with Lockheed CEO Bob Stevens., He said, 'I'm going to have to send them notices 60 days before, that they might not have a job in January.' So he's going to do that to all of his employees and to their suppliers, McKeon says., The current prevailing view in Washington is that Congress will not have the time, inclination or political will to address sequestration or any other fiscal cliff issues until after the election., McKeon is part of a vocal group of lawmakers who insist something must be done sooner., I think it should be done today, McKeon says. It should be done now. Then you don't have to even worry about the notices being sent out. We could fix it., McKeon has introduced a bill that would reduce the federal workforce by 10 percent to avoid the cuts come January. But the legislation hasn't come up for a House vote and would have virtually no chance in the Senate., Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., is pushing the White House to detail where the spending cuts would hit, giving government agencies and companies a better sense of which programs will be affected., McCain almost seems to welcome the idea of these layoff notices going out, as it might bolster the argument he's been making for months., I think the American people need to know the impact of sequestration, both on our national security, and as well as the effect on our economy, McCain says., Pragmatism, Or Political Play?, While the fallout from sequestration would be very real, it's unlikely to hit all at once in the first week of January, according to Todd Harrison, a senior fellow at the Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments., Harrison can't say whether the suggestion of layoff warnings right before Election Day is a strategic ploy by the defense industry to put pressure on Congress, but he's not convinced companies really need to send out the notices right before the election., Will they have to lay some people off down the road, within a few months [or] in the next year or two? Absolutely, Harrison says. But [as for] the timing of this are they going to have to do that starting exactly on Jan. 3? I think that's highly suspect., A recent report from the National Association of Manufacturers projects the defense cuts scheduled for 2013 would mean a loss of 1 million jobs in 2014., The report is just the latest in a series of efforts from industry groups trying to get Congress to do something to blunt the impact of the anticipated cuts., In the meantime, defense contractors big and small are watching, lobbying and wondering. It's what Lockheed Martin's CEO has taken to calling the fog of uncertainty., Della Williams, CEO of the Fort Worth, Texas-based defense firm Williams-Pyro, says her 92 employees are worried., They're just saying to me, 'Is this going to happen? And if so, should we jump now, or should we take our chances? What do you think?' , Williams says she can only respond by saying, Hopefully, this is not going to happen.
A security officer stands by the van used by attackers at the entrance of the Microsoft office in an Athens on Wednesday., A security officer stands by the van used by attackers at the entrance of the Microsoft office in an Athens on Wednesday., Early this morning, three armed assailants fire bombed the headquarters of Microsoft in Athens, Greece., The attackers used a van to ram through the front door and tried to set the building on fire using gasoline, Microsoft Greece's General Manager Ernst-Jan Stigter told reporters. Stigter added that no one was injured., The AP reports:, While a motive was not clear, small armed anarchist or domestic terrorist groups have set off attacks in Greece for decades. They usually target official buildings, banks or symbols of state power with small bombs or incendiary devices and rarely cause injuries., Police said initial information indicated three people had been inside the van. The hooded assailants forced the building's two security guards out at gunpoint before reversing the van into the front entrance, smashing the door., They then triggered an incendiary device inside the van that police said appeared to have consisted of camping gas canisters and several containers of gasoline., Reuters provides a bit of background saying while anarchists have carried out attacks since 1974, social tensions have been rising in the country because of the tough austerity measures imposed on Greece by the bailout deal it struck with the E.U., Reuters adds:, Branches of Macdonald's, Citi and Starbucks in Athens have been set on fire by protesters and militants in the past using petrol bombs or gas canisters., The attacks usually take place at night and there have rarely been injuries, but three bank staff suffocated in May 2010 when protesters set their branch on fire during a protest march in central Athens., The assault on Microsoft is a new headache for big multi-nationals in Athens already considering quitting the debt-ridden country because of unpaid bills, falling revenues and the prospect that Greece might be forced to leave the euro.
The Airlines' Dangerous Descent And How to Reclaim Our Skies, by William J. Mcgee, Hardcover, 354 pages | purchase, More on this book:, After the airline industry was deregulated in 1978, flying changed considerably., Some of those changes have improved commercial flying, but others have made the skies much less friendly, says journalist and airline veteran William J. McGee., McGee's new book, Attention All Passengers, details how airlines are cutting costs through regional carriers, outsourcing airline maintenance, mishandling baggage and overbooking airplanes., It's not your imagination that there are more people flying on each flight, he tells Fresh Air's Dave Davies. The average percentage of occupied seats on a plane these days is over 80 percent. That means a great number of flights are at 100 percent. [That has] led to all of the other problems related to service: delays, canceled flights, lost baggage, consumer complaints and passengers being involuntarily bumped off flights. ... Flying is just not a pleasant experience., Complaints of damaged and mishandled bags spiked after the Transportation Security Administration took over bag screening, says McGee., There have been a lot of high-profile cases of TSA employees who take bags into the back room, and when they come back out, things are missing, he says. To some extent the TSA has managed to get a handle on that, but it's really part of a much bigger, systemic problem within the industry ... [about] how many functions revolving around commercial aviation that are outsourced., Among those functions: everything from maintenance to customer service to baggage handling, says McGee., I don't think many passengers realize that when they're in an airport and there's some sort of a problem, and they walk up to a ticket counter and they're talking to someone who's wearing the uniform of an airline employee, that in many cases they're not [talking to] an airline employee, he says., Aircraft maintenance and repairs are also frequently outsourced in some cases to unlicensed mechanics in China, Singapore, Mexico and El Salvador., In my view, it's a critical safety issue the FAA's lack of oversight of maintenance [in these countries], he says. It used to be, if an airline had a major maintenance facility, the FAA had an office, and an inspector could pop by anytime. Now, with work being done [overseas], I've had dozens of inspectors express their frustration that they can't do their jobs. They're monitoring this work on an honor system., William McGee is a former airlines operations manager who has made a career as an aviation journalist, writing for Consumer Reports and other publications. He's an FAA-licensed aircraft dispatcher and in 2010 was named the sole consumer advocate to the Future of Aviation Advisory Committee, formed to make recommendations to the Department of Transportation., William McGee is a former airlines operations manager who has made a career as an aviation journalist, writing for Consumer Reports and other publications. He's an FAA-licensed aircraft dispatcher and in 2010 was named the sole consumer advocate to the Future of Aviation Advisory Committee, formed to make recommendations to the Department of Transportation., Mechanics have told McGee that planes come back from their maintenance trips and are not ready to fly., Among the problems they've talked about are doors that were not sealed properly. ... There are problems with engines that have had to be shut down, and there are serious problems that have led to smoke in the cabin, he says. And any time you have smoke in the cabin, that could lead to catastrophe. These airplanes are coming back in conditions where additional work needs to be done to get them back online, in many cases., The Federal Aviation Administration does not require airlines to list the subcontractors they work with. And finding out that information can be quite difficult, says McGee., Independent government organizations, including the Government Accountability Office and the Department of Transportation's Inspector General's Office, have gone to the airlines and said, 'Where is the work being done and who's doing it?' says McGee., And the airlines, amazingly, have responded that they're not clear, in some cases. To me, this is just mind-boggling. ... Congressional testimony has shown that the FAA does not even have a full sense of where the work is being done.
Pending home sales bounced back in May, matching the highest level in the past two years, and are well above year-ago levels, the National Association of Realtors reports. The association says that:, The Pending Home Sales Index, a forward-looking indicator based on contract signings, rose 5.9 percent to 101.1 in May from 95.5 in April and is 13.3 percent above May 2011 when it was 89.2. The data reflect contracts but not closings. ..., 'The housing market is clearly superior this year compared with the past four years,' says NAR chief economist Lawrence Yun., According to Bloomberg News, pending sales rose more than forecast the second economic indicator to do that today. Earlier, the Census Bureau reported that orders for durable goods rose a stronger-than-expected 1.1 percent in May from April., Reuters says economists were expecting that NAR would report pending home sales rose 1 percent in May.
There was a 1.1 percent increase in new orders for so-called durable goods in May from April, the Census Bureau says. That's more than economists had forecast, Bloomberg News reports. According to Reuters, economists thought Census would say orders went up about 0.4 percent., The rise followed declines of 0.2 percent in April and 3.7 percent in March. Durable goods are equipment and other products designed to last three or more years., According to the bureau, in May transportation equipment, up three of the last four months, had the largest increase, $1.7 billion or 2.7 percent to $63.1 billion.
Created by the federal government during the Great Depression, Fannie Mae became a Washington powerhouse: a highly profitable, private company, protected by the government and boasting huge lobbying clout. But today, Fannie Mae has essentially become a ward of the state., The collapse of the housing market has led to plenty of finger-pointing in Washington. Two easy targets are Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac., These government-backed mortgage giants had to be rescued by taxpayers and now owe the government $188 billion. Still, Fannie and Freddie, which currently make the vast majority of home loans possible, are crucial to supporting the housing market right now., But ever since their government bailout four years ago, both companies have suffered from image problems, they're under the threat of being dismantled by Congress, and many key people are leaving., A Not-So-Happy Happy Hour, You know things are bad with the company you work for when you can't even go get a drink without getting an earful about your employer., That can be pretty draining, says Andrew Wilson, a manager in corporate communications at Fannie Mae. After a long day at work recently, Wilson met up with some friends at happy hour, and was grilled by a friend of his girlfriend. He recalls that she immediately [started] peppering me with questions and said ... 'You all just want to foreclose on people.' Wilson said that is absolutely not true., But these days, Fannie and Freddie get blamed for many things. Democrats say Fannie and Freddie aren't doing enough to prevent foreclosures or to let people refinance. Republicans blame them for the housing market's collapse. NPR recently reported on questionable investments at Freddie Mac, and there has been plenty of critical coverage about the bailout., After years of criticism, many employees feel unfairly cast as bad guys. Wilson says a common experience among employees is seeing eyebrows go up and receiving some pretty tough comments after explaining where you work to someone new., That wears on you, Wilson says. There's no doubt about that., While Fannie Mae's public image has been tarnished since the housing collapse, executive Kimberly Johnson says she actually likes being at the center of the storm., While Fannie Mae's public image has been tarnished since the housing collapse, executive Kimberly Johnson says she actually likes being at the center of the storm., Some employees at Freddie Mac say they've stopped telling people where they work. Instead, they say they work at the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation, the company's original and seldom-used formal name. That seems to confuse people and avoid unwanted confrontations., Crucial To Economy, But Invisible To Most Americans, Despite some serious missteps, Fannie and Freddie are also doing a lot to stabilize the economy. You can see this work in action on the bustling trading floor at Fannie Mae's headquarters in Washington, D.C. Rows of traders behind banks of computer monitors buy and sell and basically create billions of dollars worth of home mortgages., When Americans apply for a home loan to buy a house or to refinance, they call a bank or a mortgage broker. They never see the people at Fannie Mae people like Gray MacNair who works on Fannie Mae's trading floor as the director of the Capital Markets Desk. We buy loans so that the banks have capital to create more loans, she explains., In other words, Fannie and Freddie together act like a big money pump house. They are the invisible force that keeps money flowing and available for home mortgages. We're making sure that the cash flows through efficiently to all different aspects of the mortgage market, says Kimberly Johnson, one of the top executives for trading at Fannie Mae., Preventing Housing Armageddon?, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac also guarantee mortgages, an especially important role since the financial crisis. Along with the Federal Housing Administration, they guarantee more than 90 percent of all new mortgages., Without them, economists like Eric Belsky, who heads up Harvard University's Joint Center for Housing Studies, say, the housing market crash would have been unthinkably worse., If you woke up one morning and no one could be able to get a mortgage to buy a home, [and] therefore no one would really be able to sell their homes, and no one could refinance their homes, it would have been really, really disastrous, Belsky explains., When the housing bubble burst, bad investments that Fannie and Freddie had made toward the end of the boom basically blew up on them. And Fannie and Freddie were suddenly in the red for more than $100 billion., Since they are so crucial to housing and the economy, the government bailed them out and put a regulator, known as a conservator, in charge. That regulator is Edward DeMarco, the head of the Federal Housing Finance Agency., This was a huge reversal of fortune. Fannie Mae was created by the government during the Great Depression to help average Americans get home loans on good terms. It grew into a Washington powerhouse a highly profitable private company, protected by the government, with huge lobbying power. Today, it's essentially a ward of the state., 'Day By Day, The Company Becomes Weaker', At a congressional hearing last fall, Fannie Mae's outgoing CEO, Michael Williams, got grilled about his compensation. Rep. Darrell Issa, R-Calif., said Fannie and Freddie now function almost like government agencies, but the head of Fannie Mae is getting paid 10 times what the president of the United States gets paid. Issa said, You made $9.3 million in the last two years while the president made $800,000. You think that's OK? Issa demanded of Williams., Fannie and Freddie argue that to keep the housing market afloat, they need to attract top people and pay Wall Street salaries. They are, after all, managing trillions of dollars worth of loan guarantees. They also stress that they've paid back $41 billion to the government., Many lawmakers are still sharpening their axes. But Freddie Mac's former CEO, Ed Haldeman, who just stepped down earlier this month, says elected officials who now use phrases like abolishing Freddie Mac and winding down Freddie Mac were historically supporters of the institution., Haldeman is not the only senior person leaving. Many key employees are jumping ship from Fannie and Freddie. According to Haldeman, a big concern is compensation. In November, the House Financial Services Committee voted 52-4 to put Fannie and Freddie's employees on the government pay scale. Congress has yet to take that kind of action., But the threat of drastic pay cuts has sent a chill through Freddie Mac. Some employees decided to work elsewhere just so they wouldn't have to go through that kind of anxiety and uncertainty, Haldeman says., As far as why he decided to leave, Haldeman says he didn't expect Fannie and Freddie to be run by the government for so long. He says Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson at the time described conservatorship as a time out. Haldeman says that sounded like a temporary step. But, he adds, We are now going to have our four-year anniversary four years with no plan at all., And he says as a result of that, and all the other negatives associated with working at Freddie Mac, day by day the company becomes weaker., Haldeman says that's because so many key people are leaving. In a recent SEC filing, Freddie Mac warns about the weaknesses brought about by all the departures., Surviving The Brain Drain, So Far, Fannie Mae's Andrew Wilson says that despite all of the negatives, everyone at his company tries to stay focused on doing good work. So far, he says, the company is still able to attract good people., Kimberly Johnson says she actually likes being at the center of the storm. A lot of employees at Fannie Mae feel a real sense of purpose in helping to fix the battered mortgage market and thinking about the next level of housing finance and what we want it to be like in the future, Johnson says., Still, with a lot of talent leaving, the worry is that Fannie and Freddie could make more mistakes, lose more money and bungle their mission: to responsibly foster homeownership by supporting the mortgage market., Jesse Eisinger of ProPublica contributed to this report.
Housing counselors say a growing number of homeowners from wealthy communities, like Laguna Beach, Calif., are seeking to modify loans on multimillion-dollar properties., Housing counselors say a growing number of homeowners from wealthy communities, like Laguna Beach, Calif., are seeking to modify loans on multimillion-dollar properties., The nation's housing crisis has touched countless people. Increasingly, the well-off are among them., Housing counselors around the country say they are seeing more people struggling to keep their million-dollar homes. It's a twist on a familiar story of hardship but one that involves some very big numbers., Moving Up, Falling Down, Expensive homes dot the hills overlooking the beaches and boutiques of Laguna Beach, Calif. It's a tony backdrop for an event sponsored by the Orange County Home Ownership Preservation Collaborative, a nonprofit group working to help financially distressed homeowners., John Jalali and his wife are here, seeking a loan modification on their house. Once valued at over $3 million, it's now worth about $2 million., The couple never intended to live in the home, Jalali says. Rather, it was built as an investment they hoped to sell. But that was in 2008, the year the market crashed and their income dramatically declined., To avoid foreclosure, the Jalalis had to sell their other assets including their old home and move into the big one., We were very happy in our little home, Jalali says. It was very nice; we were comfortable paying $2,500 a month., Foreclosure activity for properties valued at $1 million or more, Source: RealtyTrac, Credit: Kevin Uhrmacher/NPR, Now, the Jalalis' mortgage is $10,000 per month., The couple's two grown sons moved in to help pay the mortgage. But the family's combined income still wasn't enough, and they're behind on payments., 'It Ruined Our Life', Jalali seems jovial by nature, but even when he laughs, he nervously taps a folio of financial documents., Properties valued at $1 million or more, as a percentage of all foreclosure activity, Source: RealtyTrac, Credit: Kevin Uhrmacher/NPR, He understands that his story might not meet with much sympathy. Everybody hears this big, big number, [and] says this guy maybe doesn't need modification. Let's take his home away from him, Jalali says., He says fighting the banking bureaucracy is emotionally wrenching. His wife scours the Web for potential resources late into the night., He says the family isn't asking for loan forgiveness just a forbearance on a portion of the loan, until their income can recover and they can pay off what they owe., And, Jalali says, he will never again put money at risk., No, I never want to make an investment anymore. I just gave up, he says. I just want to be a simple man. I just don't want to go through all this., Ultimately, Jalali sums up the entire saga this way: It ruined our life., 'No Other Choice', High-value properties are only a small portion of all homes in foreclosure proceedings in the U.S., But according to research firm RealtyTrac, foreclosure activity on properties worth at least $1 million jumped between 2007 and 2011, from 5,632 homes to just over 33,000., And it's not just the number of million-dollar homes in foreclosure that has spiked. They also make up a growing percentage of all foreclosure activity rising to 1.93 percent in 2011 according to RealtyTrac. In 2007, only 0.69 percent of all properties had notices., Housing counselors around the country have noticed the trend. Several say about half the inquiries they have received in the past year have come from wealthy or formerly wealthy homeowners., These are the folks that are losing their jobs on Wall Street. These are the folks that live in Scarsdale and Bronxville, says Geoffrey Anderson, executive director of Westchester Residential Opportunities, a housing counseling group that's been fielding calls from wealthy New York suburbs., These are the people that own million-dollar homes, who have used up all their life savings and are now coming to us because they have no other choice, Anderson says., Difficult To Modify, Superjumbo home loans can be harder to modify than more modest ones. Most exceed the loan-size limit for government-sponsored programs designed to help homeowners refinance., And some counselors say banks are less likely to modify loans on homes in areas with relatively low rates of unemployment or foreclosure., Also, with a very big loan, many borrowers can't afford even a modified payment., On the other hand, banks typically take longer to foreclose on expensive homes. And families with means can often afford to pay lawyers or financial experts for help., Carolyn Haynes-Thomas, director of housing counseling programs for the Greater Sacramento Urban League in California, expects many more expensive homes to fall into trouble this year, especially in her region., Sacramento was an expensive market that has since lost a lot of value. About a third of borrowers there chose option adjustable rate mortgages, also known as Option ARM or pick-a-pay loans. While those loans require low initial payments, they ultimately end up costing borrowers more., In the Sacramento area, many such loans are due to reset to higher amounts this year. When that happens, Haynes-Thomas predicts, many homeowners will simply stop making payments., They're smart, right? Because they were typically high-income-earning, better credit borrowers, Haynes-Thomas says. [So] we know what's coming. We are going to literally have thousands of strategic defaulters., And that's just Haynes-Thomas' estimate for Sacramento. Because the loans are for more than the homes are worth, she worries homeowners will have little incentive to stick it out., Do I want to stay there now and pay hundreds more per month than somebody living across the street? Probably not, she says., And, Haynes-Thomas says, homeowners in that situation are unlikely to just pick up and move away. Instead, she expects many people will save up money while their homes move through the foreclosure process., You know, let the lender take a year and a half to foreclose, stack my money, right?, Only then, she says, will they move out, hoping to leave their problems behind.
With a simple statement saying that it is considering a restructuring to separate its business into two distinct publicly traded companies, News Corp. this morning confirmed the thrust of a story reported by its own Wall Street Journal, NPR's David Folkenflik tells us., As that Journal report states, the media and entertainment giant ruled by Rupert Murdoch is considering splitting into two companies, separating its publishing assets from its entertainment businesses., And why would it do that? The Journal says a split of News Corp.'s businesses would be welcomed by outside investors who are more interested in News Corp.'s television and film assets than its slow-growing publishing businesses., The New York Times adds that restive shareholders have often said they would prefer that the company focus on its more lucrative entertainment assets, which together generated $23.5 billion in revenue in the year ended in June 2011. The publishing business, by contrast, contributed $8.8 billion in revenue., NewsCorp. has also been rocked, of course, by the tabloid scandal that has engulfed its British newspapers., According to the Journal, the idea under consideration isn't expected to change the Murdoch family's effective control of any of the businesses., Update at 8:15 a.m. ET, June 27. David Folkenflik's Report On Wednesday's Morning Edition:, Splitting Outlets Could Help News. Corp. Investors.
We always liked the lofty design of euro notes. Until Planet Money reader Peter Minnig wrote in to point out the secret messages hidden in the notes clues that suggest all may not end well for the euro., What follows are a combination of clues Minnig pointed out, and those we found ourselves., (Sorry about that giant Specimen printed across the bills. We're just following the European Central Bank's anti-counterfeiting rules.), Source: European Central Bank, Credit: Robert Smith and Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, , Source: European Central Bank, Credit: Robert Smith and Lam Thuy Vo / NPR
Just days before student loan rates are set to double for millions of Americans, President Obama and congressional leaders haven't reached an agreement on legislation to keep those rates at 3.4 percent., The debate reflects the growing concern over the debt burden many take on to get a college education. About two-thirds of bachelor's degree recipients borrow money to attend college, and collectively, student debt has topped $1 trillion., Kevin Carey, the director of the Education Policy Program at the New America Foundation, believes the student debt crisis reflects larger, troubling trends in higher education among them excessive spending by colleges and universities, which drives up tuition, and declining government support for public universities as state and local governments face budget crises., In the past three decades, Carey says, college tuition has consistently increased much faster than both inflation and incomes., &ldquo; The percentage of all students taught by non- tenure-track professors adjuncts, teaching assistants has gone up and up and up., - Kevin Carey, Every year, [it increases] 2 or 3 or 4 percent above the inflation rate, to the point where college is now four times more expensive than it was, say 20 or 30 years ago, he says., Where does that money go? To all sorts of things, including administrative and teaching costs, scholarships, sports teams and elaborate new construction projects., [Colleges and universities] compete with one another not to make money, but for status and prestige, so they buy things that increase their status and prestige in relation to their competitors, Carey tells Fresh Air's Dave Davies. They're big on construction. ... They're always building things., College campuses may be expanding but that doesn't necessarily mean their teaching staffs are growing. Carey points out that the number of full-time professors has shrunk across the country and that less than 40 percent of students are now taught by tenure or tenure-track professors., [Professors] are not the beneficiaries of large increases in college spending that has gone on, he says. In fact, the percentage of all students taught by non-tenure-track professors adjuncts, teaching assistants has gone up and up and up., Meanwhile, university administrations have grown meaning colleges are now employing more provosts, deans and assistant deans than ever before., I'm sure that most of those people are working hard at real jobs, he says. But that doesn't necessarily mean that it's a good idea to increase spending and pass along many of those costs onto students in the form of higher tuition. ... And the more the prices go up, the more that these students who are squeezed out of opportunity are middle-income students, low-income students, and the net effect over time is to make our college and university system no longer the engine of economic mobility that it once was., The Burden Of Student Loan Debt, The average college senior in the U.S. now carries $25,000 in student loan debt at graduation. Those figures rise when graduate degrees are figured into the equation, Carey says., No one planned for that to happen, he says. No one thought that was a good idea because in fact, it's a very bad idea. The reality is that as college tuition has consistently outpaced the ability of people to pay out of pocket, debt has been the safety valve of our higher education system. It is what has allowed everything to keep running because people know they have to go to college they don't feel they have any choice so they just continue to borrow and borrow and borrow., Those debts will follow students around for decades, Carey says., Democrat or Republican, liberal or conservative, if you want a quality college education, there's a good chance you're going to spend most of your 20s in a state of indentured servitude to a lender or an employer you hate but can't quit, because the loan bills undischargeable in bankruptcy, thanks to industry lobbying will follow you to the end of time, he writes in a recent New York Daily News op-ed. Literally: The Washington Post has reported that $36 billion in loan debt is held by people over 60 years old., To change things, Carey says, colleges need to rein in spending and perhaps modify their educational models. He points to Harvard, MIT and Stanford's recent experiments with noncredit online classes, which anyone can take around the world., These are courses that are being taught to hundreds of thousands of students around the world and they don't cost anything, he says. There is now no doubt that certain kinds of students can learn a lot online. But people don't just go to college to learn; they go to college to get a job. That's the difference between a library and a college., Stanford is now experimenting with giving class participants certificates noting that they took the class and scored in a certain percentile within the class, Carey says., And in the end, all a college degree is is a piece of paper saying, 'Dear such-and-such, you took these classes and here's how you did in them,' he says. Nothing more, nothing less. It's a piece of paper that has the seal of approval from an institution that has itself been approved through accreditation, but the essential act of communication is the same., On university space, &ldquo; US News didn't invent the idea or the thought that status was a function of wealth, fame and exclusivity. You could say that about lots of things. What they have done is let fuel to the fire and created a mechanism by which universities that haven't been around for hundreds of years to climb up through the ranks and claw their way past their competitors from a status standpoint., - Kevin Carey, Universities don't do a good job of using their space. Go to any college campus on a Monday morning or Friday afternoon and you'll find empty buildings because professors and students don't like to go to class on those days., On how universities work, Universities are run for the benefit of the people who work there. That's different than a for-profit corporation, which is run for the benefit of shareholders or a regular public agency that is run for the benefit of elected officials and the public. Our colleges and universities exist in an odd position. I think the closest analogy is organized religion, where you have nonprofit institutions that have been around for a long, long time. ... They sustain themselves. They have their own set of values. If you look at the decisions they make, those values are quite apparent. Particularly our four-year colleges and universities, the professional status is bound up in academia, in scholarship. And so these universities are organized in such a way that reflects that., On professor recruitment, Professors are recruited and paid on their academic reputations, not whether they're any good at teaching. And there is a desire for status. There is a constant competition with one another. And the thing with reputational competition is that there's no end to it. You don't ever reach some point where you're as good as you can be because the only question is, 'Are you as good as the university in the next state?' So there's no ceiling to how much money colleges and universities can spend competing with one another., On rankings, They simply made numbers out of a value system that was already in place. They empiricized a sense of higher education quality that revolves around three things: wealth, exclusivity and fame. It's the wealthy institutions that have the smallest admissions rate and are the most well-known for their students and their professors that always stay atop the list. It's not a coincidence that every year Harvard and Princeton go back and forth between 1 and 2. US News didn't invent the idea or the thought that status was a function of wealth, fame and exclusivity. You could say that about lots of things. What they have done is let fuel to the fire and created a mechanism by which universities that haven't been around for hundreds of years to climb up through the ranks and claw their way past their competitors from a status standpoint.
This For Sale sign was hanging outside a home in Brooklyn, N.Y., earlier this month., This For Sale sign was hanging outside a home in Brooklyn, N.Y., earlier this month., Home prices rose in nearly all major U.S. cities in April from March, according to the latest S&P;/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices report., It has been a long time since we enjoyed such broad-based gains, David Blitzer, chairman of S&P; Indices' index committee, says in that report. While one month does not make a trend ... [the news] is a good sign., According to the data:, &mdash; Detroit was the only one of 20 major metropolitan areas to see home prices fall in April. They dropped 3.6 percent in the Motor City from the month before., &mdash; The largest increase for the month was San Francisco's 3.4 percent., &mdash; In Phoenix, where the housing sector was hit particularly hard when the real estate bubble burst, prices were up 8.6 percent from April 2011., &mdash; The indices' 10-city and 20-city composite indexes were both up 1.3 percent in April from March. But, both of those broad measures were still down from a year earlier the 10-city composite by 2.2 percent and the 20-city composite by 1.9 percent. Bloomberg News notes, however, that the 20-city index's decline from a year earlier is the smallest such year-over-year drop since November 2010., Reuters points out that the month-to-month increase in the broader measures of home prices is the third such gain in a row, suggesting the recovery in the housing market is gaining traction.
Using a Mac may mean you'll see some pricier options when booking online., Using a Mac may mean you'll see some pricier options when booking online., There's lots of chatter today about The Wall Street Journal's report that:, Orbitz Worldwide Inc. has found that people who use Apple Inc.'s Mac computers spend as much as 30% more a night on hotels, so the online travel agency is starting to show them different, and sometimes costlier, travel options than Windows visitors see., On CNet, Larry Dignan writes that Mac users will refrain from using Orbitz en masse now., The Atlantic Wire's Hannah Miet says:, It makes sense, from an advertising standpoint, to target the apparently wealthy, ad-receptive, self-assured, high-spending contingent that buys Apple products. But what about those of us who irresponsibly purchased our iPhones on credit, have only been 'directors' of our own unemployment, and are only looking for the cheapest roadside motel in Devils Lake, North Dakota?, I guess we'll have to log onto Orbitz from the computers of our low-spending, ad-averse friends. You know, the ones with inferiority complexes. Thanks, a lot, research., Now, there are a couple things to note from the Journal's report:, &mdash; Orbitz executives confirmed that the company is experimenting with showing different hotel offers to Mac and PC visitors, but said the company isn't showing the same room to different users at different prices. They also pointed out that users can opt to rank results by price., &mdash; The average household income for adult owners of Mac computers is $98,560, compared with $74,452 for a PC owner, according to Forrester Research., And as Dignan says in CNet, Apple customers are known to pay a premium for their Macs, strong design, and integrated software, and apparently are willing to spend more on other things as well., But, we wonder:, Update at 3:25 p.m. ET. More From Orbitz' CEO, Who Says The News Has Been Misconstrued And Journal's Pay Wall Is Hiding A Key Point., We just received this email statement issued on behalf of Orbitz CEO Barney Harford:, [It's] nonsense that we'd charge Mac users more for the same hotel, which is unfortunately the incorrect impression that many readers seem to be drawing from this article's 'subscriber content preview.', However, just as Mac users are willing to pay more for higher end computers, at Orbitz we've seen that Mac users are 40% more likely to book 4 or 5 star hotels as compared to PC users, and that just one of many factors that determine which hotels to recommend a given customer as part of our efforts to show customers the most relevant hotels possible., More on what we're actually doing to create a personalized experience in my recent USA Today blog post., Unfortunately WSJ editors have chosen to hide the full story behind their pay wall, so most of the world is reacting to a confusing headline, while the key point 'the company isn't showing the same room to different users at different prices' is hidden because ... the WSJ is steering users to pay more to be able to read the full article and understand what's actually happening., Update at 2:45 p.m. ET. Orbitz CEO Blogged About This In May:, Barney Harford, the company's CEO, was a guest on USA Today's Hotel Check-in blog back in May and wrote this:, We've identified that Mac users are 40% more likely to book a four- or five-star hotel than PC users. A similar skew applies for iPad users. We can use that information to influence which hotels we recommend to users we see searching on a Mac or an iPad versus a PC for example. On our website, once you get to the page for a particular property (let's call it Hotel A) we show consumers a list of alternative hotel recommendations. This list is primarily made up of nearby properties that were ultimately booked by customers who had also viewed Hotel A. That's a pretty useful feature already, but we're then able to personalize that list by taking into account factors such as whether we see that the user is using a Mac or a PC.
New York Winemaker Christopher Tracy and a bottle of his Blaufrankisch. The wine's difficult to pronounce name may attract oenophiles., New York Winemaker Christopher Tracy and a bottle of his Blaufrankisch. The wine's difficult to pronounce name may attract oenophiles., Which costs more, a bottle of Fat Bastard or a Tselepou (TSe-le-po)? What about a Cupcake versus some other name that's difficult for Americans to pronounce? Turns out, when it comes to wine, research suggests that the name alone can affect how much consumers are willing to pay for it. But is it that easy to dupe an oenophile?, As the late Richard Dawson would say: Survey says? [Ding, Ding, Ding] Yes., Take the wines of Christopher Tracy, the jovial vintner behind Channing Daughters Winery in the Hamptons. All his barrels, lined up like little wine-bellied soldiers, will eventually get bottled and all of Tracy's hard work will be summed up in a name in this case, Blaufrankisch. That's BLAU (rhymes with WOW) frank-ish., Blaufrankisch is not the easiest thing in the world to pronounce, especially when you're sitting with all your friends at a fancy restaurant. But Tracy says he's not trying to trip anyone up. He chose that name because of its connection to the grape's history., Blaufrankisch literally means blue Frankish grape in German. It's Austrian by birth and produces a spicy, complex wine grown primarily across Eastern Europe., Tracy has a couple other tongue twisters too. Tocai Friulano, we have another one called Refosco the true name for Refosco dal Peduncolo Rosso, Tracy says., These names will run you between $20 and $40 a bottle. And it appears that the doozies might make him more money than the bottles with simpler names. That's according to a marketing experiment done by Antonia Mantonakis, a wine researcher at Brock University in Ontario., Participants not only reported liking the taste of the wine better if it was associated with a difficult to pronounce winery name. But they also reported about a $2 increase in willingness to pay, Mantonakis says. (Give or take six cents in U.S. dollars.) , But here's the fun part the more Mantonakis' test subjects knew about wine, the more easily they got duped into thinking difficult wine names equaled pricier wines. She says that's because wine geeks will hunt for just about any subtle difference they can find, like a unique sounding name., And if something is rare and unique then maybe it might be a higher value and it maybe something that is more special, she says., So that's how you trick a wine geek. For the rest of us non-experts, all it takes is a bottle of something cheap and tasty, like Elephant on a Tight Rope. Also, Mad Housewife, Mommy's Time Out, Mnage Tois (or Monogamy, if you prefer). Then there's this whole fat wing to the cellar that we get sold on, like Fat Bastard, Fat Monk, Fat Bird, Fat Fish. And who doesn't love cupcakes?, Well, I have to say, I'm a little bit of a Cupcake addict. I thought that was really cute and funny when I first saw it, Mantonakis says., Wine names that are cute and funny are the ones that lure so-called low knowledge consumers, she says. Along with E &amp; J Gallo-sized shelf space and a pretty picture, we're looking for comfort and something familiar, but sometimes slightly adventurous., Does it look interesting? And if it looks interesting it might be fun and it might be the kind of wine I'm looking for, she says., Out at the Hamptons, Tracy has one of those too, he calls it Mudd. But he's says it's not about talking down to us low-knowledge drinkers or talking up to the wine geeks. It's just another way to tell the story of a place or experience., That's often, too, why people have such romantic notions of wines they had far away, overseas, on vacation. You're in a particular place to soak in all of the story and be able to go back be able to get that bottle and be able to have a piece of that story again and maybe even share it with your friends and family, he says., So if the experience you're looking to share is from an exotic, hard to pronounce vineyard, don't be too quick in paying a premium for it. Because both Mantonakis and Tracy agree the funny and fat wines can be just as good.
Eric Hagen charges people only what they can afford in his Recession Ride Taxi in Burlington, Vt., Eric Hagen charges people only what they can afford in his Recession Ride Taxi in Burlington, Vt., In a recession, watching the meter on a taxi tick higher and higher can be distressing. But in Burlington, Vt., the Recession Ride Taxi lets customers set their own price., Eric Hagen is a Wall Street banker-turned-cab-driver whose one-man pay-what-you-want taxi service has accrued dozens of faithful customers., 'I'd Be Walking', It's too early on a weekday morning, and Hagen is picking up Alan Flanders outside his apartment in Burlington's Old North End. Flanders is tired. He's heading south across town, about four miles to the country club where he works as a sous chef. Until three months ago, Flanders was unemployed, so he appreciates Hagen's taxi service., I'd be walking to work this morning if it wasn't for Eric, Flanders says., In most cabs, this ride would cost more than $20. But Hagen takes whatever amount Flanders can afford. Today, it's $12., Because I don't have a meter, it is 'pay what you want.' If I had a meter, it would still be operated the same way, Hagen says., In the three years he's been running this business, Hagen says, he has never been stiffed. He averages about 100 rides each week, with an average fare of $10 to $15. At a time when his former colleagues on Wall Street continue to feel public scorn, Hagen says Recession Ride Taxi is running on trust., People know that there's value in a service. And they're generally not going to try to get over on you, he says. People can decide for themselves., After dropping Flanders off at the country club, Hagen weaves his silver Dodge Caravan back downtown., It's Taxis Vs. Limos In Laid-Back Portland, The Experiment: In Good Times And Bad, After a series of layoffs on Wall Street, Hagen got a job with the American Red Cross in Vermont. But he says his new paycheck wasn't going far enough., By 2009, his mortgage was underwater. Hagen says that's when he got the idea for a pay-what-you-want taxi service., I was in trouble. I was like, 'Look at my mortgage. Look how high this is. Why is everything so expensive? Why not try something that gets away from price and see what people do, how they react?' he says., Deb Clark says she could definitely use more services like Hagen's. On a recent afternoon, she sits in the front seat, like a friend, as Hagen transports her between her two jobs. Clark says she depends on Recession Ride each week., I recently had to take a local cab company, and I called them ahead of time and asked for the price on the phone, she says. They gave me a certain price. I got in the cab, and they changed the price. I find that very common with cabs. And Eric is always straightforward., Hagen has left his job at the Red Cross to operate his taxi full-time. Now, he hopes to expand by adding another car or two., Considering the economy, he thinks there will be plenty of riders., I don't see those explosive economic days that we previously had. It's changed, Hagen says., Even if better days do return, Hagen says in good times or bad his pay-what-you want business model will remain the same.
Facebook Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg was named Monday to the company's board of directors. Sandberg is the first woman on Facebook's board., Facebook Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg was named Monday to the company's board of directors. Sandberg is the first woman on Facebook's board., Facebook now has a woman on its board of directors: The company announced Monday that Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg would join the board., Sandberg, the company's No.2 executive, was hired away from Google in 2008., Sheryl has been my partner in running Facebook and has been central to our growth and success over the years, Facebook founder and CEO Mark Zuckerberg said in a statement on the social networking site's website. Her understanding of our mission and long-term opportunity, and her experience both at Facebook and on public company boards makes her a natural fit for our board., There had been public calls for the company to add a woman to its board, but Facebook didn't say whether Monday's move was related to those demands., According to The Associated Press:, Sandberg has been largely responsible for building Facebook's advertising business. She's also often serves as Facebook's public face, appearing at conferences and important meetings, while Zuckerberg often prefers to stay in the background and focus on Facebook's products., Sandberg, who began her career at the World Bank, was Google's vice president of Global Online Sales and Operations. Before that she served as chief of staff for the Treasury Department under President Clinton., Facebook's other board members are: Zuckerberg, Marc L. Andreessen, Erskine Bowles, James W. Breyer, Donald Graham, Reed Hastings and Peter Thiel.
Laura Chase, a member of the MOOMilk dairy cooperative, sweeps her barn in a film still from documentary, Betting The Farm., Laura Chase, a member of the MOOMilk dairy cooperative, sweeps her barn in a film still from documentary, Betting The Farm., A year and a half after Aaron Bell lost his contract to sell milk to H.P. Hood LLC from his 45 cow dairy operation in Edmunds, Maine, he found himself leaving a voicemail with his lease agent., Hey Nina, it's Aaron, and I was just trying to catch with you regarding our lease payment, which is currently late... again... as of yesterday I believe. But like I said, I have that plan, as soon as we sell these turkeys we're going to be paying a large portion of that maybe even half a year at a time. So, I'm really sorry about that, but things are just extremely tight around here., It's a scene shown in the world premiere of documentary, Betting the Farm, at the SilverDocs film festival in Silver Spring, Md. on Friday that has played out thousands of times across the U.S. over the past four decades. Since 1970, the number of dairy farms has dropped by more than half a million., Caught between ballooning feed costs, an uncertain economy, political gamesmanship and milk processors that increasingly value the efficiency of sourcing from a few large-scale producers, dairy farmers have become a dwindling lot.When Bell was dropped by Hood in 2009, along with nine other Maine dairy farmers, they decided to form a collective and try to market their product directly to consumers., The idea is not exactly new. Milk cooperatives cropped up in the late 1800s to negotiate prices with dealers who were delivering to burgeoning urban markets, and they peaked in the 1940s. After that, dairy farms started to consolidate., But cooperatives have recently regained traction as a viable business model, especially in the thriving organic foods market and among local food enthusiasts. The largest single supplier of organic milk Organic Valley is a 1,723 member cooperative established in 1988., But for farmers like Bell, the hurdles that ultimately severed the Hood contract stymie membership in most existing businesses namely the stark remoteness of the family operation. If his cooperative called MOOMilk, or Maine's Own Organic Milk is successful, it could be a beacon for other far-flung dairy farmers who find their market ties increasingly strained., The fact that Bell was on the phone with his lease agent more than 12 months after MOOMilk was founded didn't bode well. In fact, the specter of failure loomed continually for the first two years, according to the documentary., Now, things are looking up, albeit modestly. MOOMilk has been picked up by Whole Foods and Hannaford's, as well as by a swath of small purveyors across northern New England. Even with demand for organic milk booming, though, the cooperative is struggling to push past 5,000 gallons in weekly sales., Part of the problem is that the group still has no marketing manager: Their main advertising campaign consists of CEO Bill Eldridge setting up a table in the milk aisle and handing out samples, according to the film., Till now, the strategy has relied on word of mouth and the farmers' faith in a growing public awareness of the links between sustainability and culture., The ways that people choose to spend their food dollars can make a huge difference, MOOMilk farmer Laura Chase tells The Salt. It can literally change the landscape around them. If they support local farms and purchase from people that they know, they really can change the way things look around them. And then maybe we'll have more family farms crop up.
Billionaire Larry Ellison signed a deal announced this week to buy nearly all of the 141 square-mile Hawaiian island of Lana'i., Who hasn't dreamed of having their own coral-fringed island, lounging on its sandy beach, coconut daiquiri in hand?, So the news this week that Oracle CEO Larry Ellison just purchased almost the entire Hawaiian island of Lana'i (price tag reportedly $500 million) may make most of us more than a little jealous. It's good to be Larry or Johnny (Depp) or Richard (Branson) or Celine (Dion), to name a few others in the elite club of island owners., It's not difficult to envision the benefits of having your own piece of water-bound paradise. But what about the downside? We talked to Chris Krolow, the CEO of Private Islands, a Toronto-based company that sells 20 to 25 islands a year through its website, newsletter and magazine, Private Islands., Location, Location, Location, The old adage that real estate is all about location is doubly true when it comes to buying an island, which by definition carries certain obstacles to access. In short, you're likely going to need a boat. Or perhaps a jet, which means your island had better be big enough to house a runway., It's great to have your own private island like this one in the Caribbean, unless there's a hurricane bearing down., It's great to have your own private island like this one in the Caribbean, unless there's a hurricane bearing down., Most people who want an island are avid boaters, Krolow says. Ellison, who has competed in numerous offshore sailing races and owns his own elite sailing team, certainly qualifies. But even the most ardent boater wants relatively easy access to their island idyll., Krolow recalls showing one couple an island in the Bahamas recently. We spent 13 hours getting to it by cigarette boat, and it was sort of obvious that the husband and wife thought that was too much, he says., Then there was that $28,000 steal that sold not long ago in Nova Scotia a very remote part of Nova Scotia., If your island is near an area that is supersaturated or superdeveloped, like parts of 'cottage country' near Toronto, chances are the islands are going to go for a premium, Krolow says. The opposite is true in Nova Scotia, where locals would never buy an island they don't want to deal with the hassles of getting there, the weather and the fog., Weather can be an obvious problem. Paradise can seem anything but, if there's a hurricane or tropical storm with damaging winds and dangerous squalls bearing down., Blue Skies And Red Tape, Islands typically have their own ecosystems, and in many locations, you'll need an environmental impact study before you can even begin to think about development., In the Bahamas, where Private Islands does a lot of business, that's likely to cost a cool $50,000 or so, Krolow says. And in Ontario, any island you buy has to be a minimum of 1 acre in area or you won't get a permit to build on it., There's also the possibility that someone else will claim it's their island, not yours., Every once in a while, there may be someone contesting a deed on the basis of squatter rights, Krolow says. It's happened in the past in Central America, and that's caused the deal to fall through., And what if someone demands to use the beach on your island?, A couple who bought Dobbins Island in the mouth of Maryland's Magothy River in 2003 found themselves embroiled in a years-long battle with boaters and environmentalists over public access and development on the 7-acre island. The legal fight still isn't over., What About Indoor Plumbing?, To avoid these environmental and land-use restrictions, many island shoppers look for the sweet spot between developed and undeveloped, Krolow says. But they could be in for a rude awakening when it comes to some of the costs and concerns involved with development., The most sought-after islands are the ones that have some development, but it's not necessarily reflected in the price because it's dilapidated or whatnot, he says. That's because you can usually replace whatever was there without too many restrictions, and that can save a lot of time and money., You might get lucky and have a good freshwater source of water on your island, but getting power from the mainland is a big, big bonus, Krolow says. Otherwise, you've got to generate it yourself., And hauling a generator, not to mention other building materials should you want to build anything on your island, isn't easy or cheap., King Of The Castle, So an island that's already developed can be good, but you'd better like what the previous owner did with it., Krolow cites one particular island in the Bahamas with an asking price of $10 million., It had its own runway, a series of buildings, sandy beaches and even power from the mainland, he says. But it stayed on the market for a very long time and, in my opinion, sold for way under price because there wasn't a lot of 'vision' left., That's because buying an island is something of a mini-exercise in megalomania many owners want to make their own kingdom, not one inherited from someone else. Of course, once you've created your island empire, the flip-flop is on the other foot once you want to sell., Perhaps more than any other type of real estate, an island invites the owner to make their mark, Krolow says. So islands that are already overdeveloped something where that vision is already pretty much done those might stay on the market for longer., A Question Of Privacy, An island might sound like the perfect place to get away from the stresses of life on the mainland, but too much privacy can be stifling for some people. Celebrities may have a different problem., Most of us probably wouldn't have to worry about being stalked on our own private island. Not so if you're Johnny Depp., In this era of Google Earth, an island isn't the best hiding place, Krolow says.
Vanessa Loren shops in Miami. An index of consumer sentiment dropped more than expected in June., Vanessa Loren shops in Miami. An index of consumer sentiment dropped more than expected in June., When Moody's downgraded the credit ratings of most major U.S. banks on Thursday, you'd have thought Friday would be a tough day for bank stocks., But bank stocks ticked up largely because investors were relieved. They had feared the downgrades would be worse. The Dow Jones industrial average was recovering from Thursday's 250-point drop, the second-worst of the year., And that's the kind of week it was: lousy, but not as bad as it might have been. The euro didn't collapse, bank stocks didn't crash, and the Federal Reserve's policymakers didn't do or say anything unexpected at the end of their gathering on Wednesday., For consumers and business owners, a week of weaving around potential calamities was not exactly a confidence builder., There's an overall sense of frustration, Paul Root said in a phone interview. He and his wife, Jennifer, own Diablo Kennels in Bay Point, Calif. After 22 years in business as a dog groomer and kennel operator, he's struggling to survive in an economy characterized by unrelenting rounds of credit downgrades, market volatility and political paralysis., For his small business to flourish, he needs his customers to feel confident enough to go on vacation and leave their dogs behind for a bath at the kennel. But the confidence just isn't back yet, he said., We've become a luxury in hard times, he said. Instead of planning trips, his customers remain wary and watchful. They're confused. They're scared, he said., Those worries are reflected in readings of consumer confidence. The Thomson Reuters/University of Michigan index of consumer sentiment dropped more than expected, to 74.1 in June from 79.3 the previous month., Consumers have good reason to feel uneasy. Each day, they get hit with news about rising risks over big slowdowns in Europe and China. And in this country, job growth has been slowing, with employers adding just 69,000 jobs in May a sluggish pace., Bank downgrades, weak consumer confidence and feeble employment growth do not combine to create a healthy environment for U.S. manufacturers, according to Daniel Meckstroth, chief economist for the Manufacturers Alliance for Productivity and Innovation., As far as consumer spending goes, there's zero prospect of that growing in such conditions, Meckstroth said., And just as U.S. consumers are backing away from shopping, exports to Europe are slowing and U.S. corporations are becoming less willing to invest in equipment, he said., That's the impact of all the uncertainty surrounding Europe and the financial system, he said., And another big wet blanket is the congressional stalemate over major decisions involving taxes and spending. That's a self-inflicted wound, he said., Meckstroth predicts the many worries will linger because all are tied to very complicated political problems, both in Washington and in Brussels. Americans can expect many more weeks like this one, where the good news is simply that the worst didn't happen. I don't see anything that is going to break this cycle, Meckstroth said.
The cost to build a Toyota Prius hasn't changed much in the past five years if you measure the cost in Japanese yen. But if you measure the cost in dollars, it's a different story. In 2007, it cost Toyota about $16,000 to build a Prius. Now, it's more like $24,000., That's because the value of the yen has risen relative to the dollar. In 2007, $1 bought 124 yen; today, $1 buys just 79 yen., Toyota and other Japanese car makers haven't passed that higher cost on to U.S. consumers, partly because it would be awful for sales. Instead, the companies have cut back on incentives for buyers, limited exports of cars from Japan, and cut material costs in cars. Auto analysts and critics have pointed to the push to control costs as a reason Consumer Reports downgraded the Honda Civic (this was a big deal among car people)., At the same time, the strong yen (among other factors) has Japanese automakers looking to build more cars in the U.S. Toyota plans to add more than 3,000 jobs in the U.S., and increase production at it assembly and engine facilities in the U.S. Nissan has said that within a few years, 90 percent of the cars it sells in the U.S. will be made here., The strong yen also means goods made in the U.S. can be sold more cheaply in Japan. American carmakers have never had much of a presence in Japan, where domestic car makers control more than 90 percent of the market. But with American cars growing smaller and the strong yen helping prices, this may be a moment for American manufacturers to start building a market in Japan., As we've noted before, weak currency sounds bad, and strong currency sounds good. But for economic growth, the opposite is often true.
If you think supermodels are the only ones who get gussied up and airbrushed during photo shoots, think again. Food companies use stylist magic that can cost big bucks, too, but mere mortals like us rarely get to see how that magic is made., In a novel marketing move, McDonald's Canada recently posted a You Tube video of Marketing Director Hope Bagozzi responding to a customer's question about why the famous burgers looks better in front of the lens., As the British marketing blog The Drum describes it, Bagozzi guides the viewer through the steps of how the marketing firm they've hired is painstakingly reconstructing a store bought quarter pounder with cheese with surgical precision., Using the same ingredients as McDonalds does, watch as condiments move forward in the frame, microscopic bun holes are fixed, and the cheese is Photoshopped into an even melt. Of course the process takes hours, rather than minutes, to produce one burger, so it's not likely to be coming to a franchise near you., The video has racked up over three million hits since it was posted June 19., For more on meat, why we eat it, and how much it costs, watch this space, search #meatweek on Twitter and listen to Morning Edition all next week.
This matzo ball soup may be kosher, but that doesn't necessarily mean it's better for you., This matzo ball soup may be kosher, but that doesn't necessarily mean it's better for you., Grandma's can of matzo ball soup and jar of gefilte fish have never seen such love., No, there hasn't been a massive boom in the Jewish population, but demand for products made under strict rabbinical supervision i.e. kosher products is exploding, according to data from market research firm Mintel. So what accounts for the revival of these most ancient food rules?, The kosher market is no longer limited to orthodox Jews. It's Muslims and Seventh-Day Adventists, who have similar rules about how meats should be handled to keep them pure. It's vegetarians and Buddhists. And increasingly, it's all kinds of people looking for a little reassurance., There is a feeling by many consumers that kosher is somehow better, more wholesome, says Mintel analyst Lynn Dornblaser., As we've reported before, kosher products are not necessarily any safer or better for you, but the sentiment prevails., So much so that since 2007, more than a quarter of all new foods released each year have claimed to be produced in accordance with Jewish dietary laws. That's ten times the proportion of new kosher products back in 2002, according to Mintel's research., Something similar is happening with claims about gluten, Dornblaser says. Claims that a food is free of or low in gluten or other allergens are among the fastest growing types of claims made on new food products in recent years., Even people without a gluten sensitivity or celiac disease are opting for gluten-free products on the theory that if it's gluten-free, it must be healthy. As a Harvard gastroenterologist told NPR's Allison Aubrey last October, It's just not the case. But people seem to believe it anyway., Dornblaser tells The Salt that companies respond to what customers want. We see those consumer demands showing up in these numbers, she says., In fact, label claims say a lot about consumer demands or at least, what marketers think we're demanding. Before 2003, when the craze over the Atkins diet took hold, there were hardly any foods marketed as low carb. As the diet's popularity peaked in 2004, low-carb claims were emblazoned on 13 percent of new products. But now that number has dropped to a trickle., Other trends, says Dornblaser, develop more slowly as consumers' values change. These days, she says, there's more of a focus on what we would call 'inherent goodness', meaning claims that address the bigger global picture., That's an important and kind of a fundamental shift that we see in the market place, Dornblaser says. She says the slow but steady growth of label claims about genetically modified ingredients, or ethical farm practices, probably reflects ongoing changes in American's attitudes about those issues., Mintel looked at about 20,000 food products introduced in 2011 for their analysis.
Anne-Marie Slaughter is the Bert G. Kerstetter '66 University Professor of Politics and International Affairs at Princeton University. She was previously the director of policy planning for the U.S. State Department and dean of Princeton's Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs., Anne-Marie Slaughter is the Bert G. Kerstetter '66 University Professor of Politics and International Affairs at Princeton University. She was previously the director of policy planning for the U.S. State Department and dean of Princeton's Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs., For two years, Princeton professor Anne-Marie Slaughter was the director of policy planning at the State Department. It was her dream job the job she imagined herself doing in college., I loved the work, she tells Fresh Air's Terry Gross. It was work I was so passionate about., Slaughter commuted to the State Department in Washington, D.C., every week from Princeton, N.J., where her husband and two teenage sons lived., From Monday through Friday, I would [get to work] between 7 and 8 in the morning and then work all day in the State Department and then rarely got home until 10-11 at night, she says. And when things got truly intense, [I stayed] much later than that., On weekends, Slaughter traveled back to Princeton to spend time with her family. But in 2011, she decided to leave her dream job and return to New Jersey., After two years, I very much wanted to go home, she says. And that recognition of wanting to go home was a revelation, in terms of my own ambitions and sense of identity, as somebody who's always been a career woman and very proud of that and committed to my career, to realize, 'Wait a minute, we had children. And this is a huge part of my life that I don't want to miss.' ... I never expected to have that division; I have always been able to integrate work and family. ... I didn't realize that I would feel torn in two., &ldquo; [We assume] that the worker who works longest is most committed as opposed to valuing time management and efficiency at getting things done over the length of time. And second, [we assume] that that time has to be spent at the office., - Anne-Marie Slaughter, Slaughter recently wrote about her experiences in The Atlantic, in a cover story titled Why Women Still Can't Have It All. In it, she details the balancing act that women face when holding high-powered positions and raising children at the same time. She also details what needs to change both in workplaces and in society to create equal opportunities for all working women., I still strongly believe that women can 'have it all' (and that men can, too). I believe that we can 'have it all at the same time.' But not today, not with the way America's economy and society are currently structured, she writes. My experiences over the past three years have forced me to confront a number of uncomfortable facts that need to be widely acknowledged and quickly changed., Those changes include recognizing the needs of both parents and giving them both time off when they first become caregivers. But the deeper problems, Slaughter says, are more cultural and extend beyond the first months of parenting., [We assume] that the worker who works longest is most committed as opposed to valuing time management and efficiency at getting things done over the length of time, she says. And second, [we assume] that that time has to be spent at the office., What that means, Slaughter says, is that primary caregivers are constantly facing the choice of being seen as less professional if they leave work early even if they're then doing work at home., A female reporter wrote to me after reading the article yesterday and said, 'For almost 30 years, I've been feeling guilty for leaving at 6 to try to catch that last inning of my son's baseball game, and my editors think I'm just not as committed to my job as my male peers, but the other parents think I'm not that committed to my child, and I feel like a failure in both places,' she says. Whereas if you let women work when they need to get the work done when they leave the office but then go back to their computers later, they'll get the job done. But they'll do it when they need to do it, juggling what's most important., On time management, If you said, 'Look, what I want is to prioritize time management, not in terms of who logs the most hours in the office, but I'm going to look at who gets the most work done in the shortest amount of time the most and highest-quality amount of work in the shortest amount of time, because I privilege efficiency and productivity, and I think, frankly, people who can do that are reliable and professional, and that's going to be my measure,' I think you'd be very surprised in terms of who's actually doing the best work. I think a lot of this needs to shift, not in terms of thinking, 'Oh, I need to hire women' but in 'What are the norms of this office and how can I allow people to lead the lives they need to lead and do the best and highest-quality work?' , On differential pressures, It's hard to articulate exactly that sense of taboo, but effectively in my generation, when we're in public, we say 'women can have it all,' and we don't acknowledge differences between men and women. So we don't talk about differential pressures in terms of having kids, much less different feelings about work and children. But when the doors are shut, there's a tremendous amount of discussion of the difficulties. Without men present, then a very different conversation goes on., On women at the State Department, It is much harder for a woman who is working in government, who is based elsewhere, to move her family to Washington when her husband's working and her kids are in school and have doctors and play dates than it is for a man who has a wife not working outside the home to move the family to Washington. It is not easy in any case, but when it's the woman who's moving to Washington, there's nobody to move the family. So many of these women [at the State Department] are commuting, and all of them had the same kinds of stresses I did. ... We all got together at one point and people were saying how difficult this was, and finally someone said, 'Why are we doing this?' and someone else said, 'Because we're role models, and it's important for other people to do it.' And I think we all believed that, but we also recognized that something had to give., On delaying kids when balancing a career, My generation of women knew we wanted to be career women. We went to graduate school. And then many of us faced [questions like]: Do you want to make partner? Are you going to try to be a board-certified physician? Are you going to try to be a tenured professor? Are you going to do that first? If so, it's going to be very hard to have kids then. So delayed childbearing I had my second child at 40. I got tenure when I was 35, and then started trying. It took awhile. So the result is, in my mid-50s you would think I'd be free to take the best or biggest job I possibly could that's exactly when my kids are teenagers. So I'm very privileged to be in academics, but I worked very hard to be in a tenured position before I had kids., On when to have kids, I don't think there's one path. I think every woman faces different choices. But it's tough because biologically there's a range where women can have biological children, and if that's what you want to do, then you are going to have to make some tradeoffs either then or later.
There were 387,000 first-time claims for jobless benefits filed last week, down just 2,000 from the week before, the Employment and Training Administration reports., The previous week's number, by the way, was revised up slightly to 389,000 from the initial estimate of 386,000., The Associated Press writes that:, Applications are a measure of the pace of layoffs. They have been edging up in recent weeks after falling steadily over the fall and winter. In the past six weeks, applications have increased nearly 5 percent. When applications fall below 375,000, it generally suggests hiring is strong enough to reduce the unemployment rate.
Imagine you were 35 years away from retirement with a $25,000 401(k) balance and an average annual return of 7 percent. If fees were 0.5 percent, your investment will be worth $227,000 after 35 years. However, if fees were 1.5 percent, your balance will be worth $163,000. A 1-percentage-point fee difference reduces your savings by 28 percent., Source: Department of Labor, Credit: Kevin Uhrmacher / NPR, As Americans watched their nest eggs sink during the Great Recession, many wondered whether they would ever be able to retire. Come this fall, millions of workers who invest in 401(k)s will learn their plans are probably worth even less than they thought., Fees take away from the accumulated savings of your lifetime, says Mary Beth Franklin, a contributing editor at InvestmentNews., As of July 1, the Labor Department will require 401(k) plan providers to clearly disclose how much in fees they're charging on those retirement savings. Plan participants will see those fees detailed in their third-quarter statements, which will arrive around Thanksgiving, Franklin tells Morning Edition co-host Renee Montagne., Fees can range from 1.08 percent (for plans with more than $100 million in assets) to 1.90 percent (for those with less than $10 million in assets), according to a report from the Government Accountability Office. Plans with fewer than 100 members which account for 88 percent of plans averaged about 1.30 percent in fees., On why these fees are hidden, If the employer is in the business of making widgets, all he wants to do is make widgets, and he's offering the 401(k) plan as a way to attract and retain employees, and wants to offer a good plan but as cost-effective as possible. And if a financial services company comes to him and says, 'Oh, we can set up this whole plan and it's not going to cost you anything,' he may take that at face value. But various commissions and load fees and administrative fees may be woven into the cost of the plan, and they're not apparent., On what you can do with high fees, Administration fees. These cover the daily functions of a 401(k) plan, including record keeping, legal disclosures and trustee services. Those fees also help pay for customer service, educational seminars and online services., Investment fees. Associated with managing plan investments and generally are assessed as a percentage of assets invested and deducted immediately from your investment returns., Individual service fees. Associated with 401(k) plans that offer optional service features and are charged separately, such as for taking a loan from the plan., More fees. Investment-related fees include sales charges, which are the costs of buying and selling shares; asset-management fees; and fees for other services, such as recordkeeping and investment advice., Source: Labor Department, You can't just opt out and say, 'OK, I just want a whole new lineup of funds.' The 401(k) is offered for the benefit of all the employees. But that would certainly start some water-cooler and cafeteria conversations, I think, to go to the employer or to your 401(k) investment committee, whatever, and saying, 'Hey, this is a lot more than we thought. Can you take a look at our plan and see if we're getting the best deal for our money or are there lower-cost alternatives?', Now, some people worry that a negative impact of this could be employees could look at this statement and say, 'Wow, I'm paying all of this in fees. What's the point? I'm not even going to save anymore.' Frankly, I don't think that's going to happen. I hope that doesn't happen. I hope this becomes a tipping point for real conversation about our retirement system. People are realizing they have to be more responsible with their own savings, but employers should give them the opportunity to get the biggest bang for their buck., On how companies may react, This is costing employers a lot of money to offer this. Certainly, there [are] tax incentives involved, but they don't want to be spending more money than they need to on a plan nobody likes. So the incentive is all-around for employees and employers to take a clear look at what they're getting, and they may be surprised and then take steps to make it better. I think this will influence fees across the board in 401(k) plans plan providers because there was this veil protecting the amount of fees they're charging. Full disclosure is going to put down more pressure on these fees. I think it's a good thing in the long run.
Jennifer Bryant has made more than 30 offers on houses, mostly from her cellphone, in many cases without viewing the property. She has lost every bid, and says she often loses to all-cash buyers., Jennifer Bryant has made more than 30 offers on houses, mostly from her cellphone, in many cases without viewing the property. She has lost every bid, and says she often loses to all-cash buyers., For-sale homes in California are sparse, even in areas with high foreclosure rates. It has led to buyers like Jennifer Bryant, who is willing to throw money at just about anyone willing to sell her a house., Since February, Bryant has made 35 offers on homes in Riverside, only to be elbowed out by other bids. With few houses available and many bidders chasing these properties, she feels she has, at most, an hour to consider each house., Some of these houses that I've offered on, I haven't even actually seen, she says. If my husband can't go by it, I'll just make an offer on it. If I haven't seen pictures of it, I'll just make the offer on it., Bryant spends lunch breaks by the fountain in front of the medical center where she works. Using her phone, she looks at the day's new listings., The inventory of existing homes for sale fell more than 20 percent in the year through April., Source: National Association of Realtors, Credit: Nelson Hsu / NPR, As Bryant glances over a description of a fenced home with large trees on its front lawn, she guesses it's pending a cash sale. And maybe so: The house was off the market within five hours of its listing., Bryant sometimes offers more than the asking price, even getting up in the middle of the night to check more listings. She says she's desperate to leave her tiny rental, which has no air conditioning and costs more than a mortgage., The cruel irony for Bryant is that she sees vacant homes everywhere, from her drive to work to a neighboring home where she resides. But vacant does not mean available. The house may still be in the process of foreclosure., Paul Herrera, government affairs director for the Inland Valleys Association of Realtors in Riverside, says there are 40 percent fewer homes on the market compared with last year, and sales volume is up., Herrera says homebuyers like Bryant are often losing to a growing field of investors, often backed by Wall Street, who are willing to pay cash., Cash is always king in this sort of situation, he says., Daily auctions are held on foreclosed properties in front of the county courthouse in Corona, Calif. About 80 bidders, representing investors, show up to bid on properties., Daily auctions are held on foreclosed properties in front of the county courthouse in Corona, Calif. About 80 bidders, representing investors, show up to bid on properties., Investors Outbidding Families For Homes, In front of a county courthouse in Corona, about 80 bidders with lawn chairs sit in the shade as trustee sales for foreclosed properties are under way. Nearly all of them have their cellphones and envelopes full of cashier's checks to pay for their winning offers., No one here is bidding on a home to live in it. They're people like Gabriel Anguiano, who's recast himself from golf course manager to minor real estate tycoon. In the past four years, he's bought and rehabbed 120 houses to rent or flip., I would buy a $30,000 condo, put in another $5,000 in remodels and then sell it for 80, 90. So you make $50,000, he says., Demand for rentals is also high because those who lost their homes need a place to stay. Anguiano can rent a property and still make a tidy profit. The only problem is that others are catching on., The activity on foreclosed homes is happening in several other hard-hit markets. But a low-inventory issue is the opposite of what many housing experts expected to see., After five major banks settled cases with regulators over mismanaged foreclosures earlier this year, analysts expected a flood of new inventory. It didn't come., Experts say banks may be reluctant to foreclose because they don't want to recognize a loss on their books. Or perhaps banks may be giving homeowners more time to modify loans. Either way, the foreclosure process has, if anything, slowed further., Revamping Abandoned Homes For Buyers, Sean O'Toole founded ForeclosureRadar, which keeps data on foreclosures. He says government officials have misdiagnosed the country's housing problem, focusing policies mostly on foreclosure prevention. But in doing so, they simply slowed a recovery., We worry about the blight from foreclosures, but once a house is foreclosed upon, it's resold to somebody who's going to take care of it and fix it up and pay the property taxes, he says., That's when home shoppers like Mike Strugatz come in. He's bought two dozen distressed properties that have been pillaged by looters or former owners., Mike Strugatz is an investor who's bought and renovated about two dozen distressed homes in the Riverside and Lake Elsinore area. He says with less inventory on the market recently, it's getting harder to find properties, and banks are demanding higher prices even for destroyed homes., Mike Strugatz is an investor who's bought and renovated about two dozen distressed homes in the Riverside and Lake Elsinore area. He says with less inventory on the market recently, it's getting harder to find properties, and banks are demanding higher prices even for destroyed homes., As Strugatz surveys a four-bedroom ranch-style home, it bears all the marks of abandonment. It smells of dog, there's graffiti on the walls, and the empty pool is filled with debris., Strugatz says only cash investors can buy homes like this. It wouldn't appraise for a buyer with a loan., Creating inventory out of a property like this, which doesn't count as inventory in its current condition, is really what I'm doing. So I'm really feeding the market with inventory that wouldn't be there, he says., His efforts help the bank that needs to sell, the family that needs to buy, and the community that needs a healthier housing market.
Jestina Clayton, would-be braider., Note: This post was updated to add audio from Morning Edition., Jestina Clayton learned how to braid hair as a girl growing up in Sierra Leone. When she was 18, she moved to America. Got married, had a couple kids, went to college., When she graduated from college, she found that the pay from an entry-level office job would barely cover the cost of child care. So she decided to work from her home in Utah and start a hair-braiding business., She found a little niche, braiding the hair of adopted African children. To find new business, she posted an ad on a local Web site., Then, one day, she got an email from a stranger. It is illegal in the state of Utah to do any form of extensions without a valid cosmetology license, the e-mail read. Please delete your ad, or you will be reported., It takes nearly two years of school and about $16,000 in tuition to get a cosmetology license in Utah. And schools teach little or nothing about African hair braiding., Clayton wound up closing her business., In this week's New York Times Magazine, I write about the spread of licensing laws like the one that forced Clayton to shut down., In the 1950s, fewer than 5 percent of American workers needed a license to do their job. Today, about a third of workers need licenses., The increase has been driven partly by the shift away from manufacturing jobs (which don't tend to be licensed) and toward service jobs (which often require licenses)., But it's also been driven by a push from professions themselves. Licensing rules make it harder for new people to enter a field. That's good for people who are already in the profession, because it limits competition and allows them to raise prices. So professions go to lawmakers and say: You need to regulate us., Everyone assumes that private interests fight like crazy not to be regulated, Charles Wheelan, who teaches public policy at the University of Chicago, told me. But often, for businesses, regulation is your friend., Obviously, it's in the public interest to license some professions. I sleep better at night knowing that the commercial pilots flying over my house and the infectious-disease specialist at the hospital down the street are licensed., But taken to excess, licensing rules raise prices for consumers and make it harder for people to find work even as they do little or nothing to protect the public., A wide range of activists and economists are pushing to loosen licensing rules. Michelle Obama has called for states to loosen the rules for military spouses, who move frequently from state to state. The Institute for Justice, a libertarian law firm, has filed a lawsuit on Clayton's behalf as part of a broad campaign against the rules., But the political calculus makes it nearly impossible to loosen the rules. When you talk about reductions in licensing, you have every occupation from the plumbers to the C.P.A.'s to the electricians lining up to argue why regulation should not be reduced, Morris Kleiner, a University of Minnesota economist who studies licensing, told me., Read the whole column here.
Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke speaks during a news conference on Wednesday in Washington, DC., Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke speaks during a news conference on Wednesday in Washington, DC., The Federal Reserve is ready to take further action including the purchase of Treasury bonds to provide support for the economy, the Chairman of the Fed Ben Bernanke said during a press conference., Bernanke also said that the members of the Federal Open Market Committee had marked down their outlooks on the economy., Most expect there to be little change in the unemployment rate through the end of the year. The consensus, said Bernanke, is that the Fed expects slow progress on unemployment and most opinions are weighted toward slower growth on the GDP., With that outlook which didn't expect the unemployment rate to dip below 8 percent this year the chairman was peppered with questions about whether the Federal Reserve's actions have been too timid., Bernanke said that the Committee's decision to extend its Operation Twist until the end of the year and pump an additional $267 billion into the program, which intends to lower the interest rates on long-term loans, was a meaningful additional step., Bernanke said that before the Fed takes new measures, they need more information., He added that non-traditional programs meaning programs outside of adjusting the interest rate on federal funds have costs., So programs, like a third round of quantitative easing, should not be launched lightly., Update at 3:20 p.m. ET. Economic Projections: , As Bernanke was speaking, the Fed released the economic projections (pdf) of the Federal Reserve board members and Federal Reserve bank presidents. Here's the chart to rule all charts (click to enlarge):, Fed projections., Fed projections., We'll note that they project the unemployment rate isn't expected to change much through the end of 2013. The projections were also more pessimistic than they were in April., Update at 3:03 p.m. ET. More Highlights:, Here are a few more highlights from Bernanke's comments:, &mdash; On the so-called fiscal cliff, Bernanke said that right now it is still a bit early for it to affect the economy. But if Congress doesn't act to keep Bush-era tax cuts from expiring and big automatic spending cuts, the uncertainty will have an economic effect., Markets don't like uncertainty, Bernanke said., &mdash; Bernanke gave a list of head winds facing the economy. Among them:, Update at 2:25 p.m. ET. Lowered Outlook: , In his press conference, Bernanke said that most members of the Federal Reserve have marked down their outlooks of the economy., Most expect there to be little change in the unemployment rate through the end of the year. The consensus, said Bernanke, is that the Fed expects slow progress on unemployment and most opinions are weighted toward slower growth on the GDP., The AP reports on the published forecast:, In an updated forecast, the Fed says it expects the economy will grow no faster than 2.4 percent this year. That's much slower than the Fed's April forecast, which projected growth as fast as 2.9 percent. And it is not much better than the 1.9 percent annual pace from the first three months of the year., The Fed also predicts the unemployment rate will fall no lower than 8 percent by the end of the year. It currently stands at 8.2 percent. In April, the Fed said the rate could be as low as 7.8 percent at year's end., The central bank is forecasting lower inflation. At its highest, it expects inflation to rise 1.7 percent this year, well below its 2 percent target. The decline is largely because of a steep drop in gas prices.
The Federal Reserve just said it would extend Operation Twist., We talked about Operation Twist earlier this month, when we spoke with Joseph Gagnon, a former Fed economist now at the Peterson institute., We wrote:, The Fed has been selling short-term government bonds and buying long-term government bonds. People call this Operation Twist, and the the main effect is to push long-term interest rates down. (Short-term interest rates have remained super low, largely due to other Fed policies.) The Fed may announce that it's extending this program by a few months., Gagnon says it's pretty likely that the Fed will do this. In fact, it's so likely that it's already priced into government bonds. , The basic idea of pushing down long-term interest rates is to encourage people to borrow and spend money, and to encourage businesses to borrow and hire., But long-term interest rates are already near record lows. The bigger problem is that lots of people still can't get loans at all., If you don't need the money, you can get it all day long, a business owner recently told the WSJ. Thank you, Ben Bernanke., Gagnon told us earlier this month that the impact of extending operation twist would be relatively small., For more, see The Fed In 3 Phrases.
Update at 12:33 p.m. ET. Fed Extends 'Operation Twist': , The Federal Reserve said it was extending its Operation Twist through the end of year. It will add $267 billion more to the program in which the Fed sells some of its medium-term bonds in order to buy longer-term ones. In theory, that pushes down the interest rate on longer-term loans, especially mortgages., In its statement, the Federal Reserve said it was taking that step because since its last meeting in April, growth in employment has slowed in recent months, and the unemployment rate remains elevated., The Fed added:, Business fixed investment has continued to advance. Household spending appears to be rising at a somewhat slower pace than earlier in the year. Despite some signs of improvement, the housing sector remains depressed. Inflation has declined, mainly reflecting lower prices of crude oil and gasoline, and longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable., All but one of the members of the Federal Open Market Committee voted in favor of the action., Update at 12:39 p.m. ET. Economic Forecast: , The Fed said that the housing sector remains depressed and inflation has declined., Still the Fed basically kept the same outlook its had for the economy for a while, now. It said:, The Committee expects economic growth to remain moderate over coming quarters and then to pick up very gradually. Consequently, the Committee anticipates that the unemployment rate will decline only slowly toward levels that it judges to be consistent with its dual mandate. Furthermore, strains in global financial markets continue to pose significant downside risks to the economic outlook. The Committee anticipates that inflation over the medium term will run at or below the rate that it judges most consistent with its dual mandate., Update at 12:41 p.m. ET. Interest Rate At Near Zero: , As expected, the Committee said that it was keeping the interest rate for federal funds at near zero. It said it expects to keep that rate at exceptionally low levels at least through late 2014., Update at 12:52 p.m. ET. Stocks Stumble:, The Wall Street Journal reports that the Fed's announcement, the American stock markets dipped:, The Dow Jones Industrial Average lost 68 points, or 0.5%, to 12766, after trading lower by about 30 points prior to the announcement. The Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index lost nine points, or 0.7%, to 1349, and the Nasdaq Composite declined 15 points, or 0.5%, to 2917., The Dow initially dropped as many as 90 points before bouncing back modestly in the following minutes. The euro also dropped as the dollar moved higher. Gold was largely unchanged after the announcement, off about 1.3% on the day., Update at 1:31 p.m. ET. Rates Already Low: , One criticism of the Twist program you'll hear is that it won't help ease the housing market because interest rates are already at historic lows., Not so says The Wall Street Journal:, The issue to consider here is, again, the counterfactual. The Fed has been a big force pushing long rates down by engaging in the twist. If it stopped, you could have seen some movement in the other direction. No movement doesn't necessary mean it was unsuccessful., Our Original Post Continues:, All eyes are on the Federal Reserve today. The Federal Open Market Committee finishes its two-day meeting and they will issue a statement at 12:30 p.m. ET., Remember, since the FOMC last met, all signs have pointed to a slowing economy and many are expecting the Fed to take further action to stimulate the economy., Bloomberg surveyed economists and most of them believe the Federal Reserve is unlikely to announce the third round of quantitative easing. Instead, the economists said, they see the Fed expanding Operation Twist beyond $400 billion., Bloomberg reports: , Fifty-eight percent of respondents in a June 18 poll said the Fed will prolong the program, which seeks to lower borrowing costs by extending the average maturity of the securities in the central bank's portfolio. The current program ends this month., Policy makers led by Chairman Ben S. Bernanke may conclude that growth is too feeble to reduce unemployment much further after payroll growth came close to stalling in May. At the same time, with inflation close to their 2 percent goal and the Greek election reducing the risk of a euro breakup, they may decide an additional round of quantitative easing isn't needed for now, economists said., One analyst said Operation Twist would be the path of least resistance. Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke is also scheduled to give a press conference at 2:15 p.m. ET., Just for clarity, in Operation Twist, which was enacted in September, the Fed sold some of its medium-term bonds in order to buy longer-term ones. In theory that puts downward pressure on longer-term rates., NPR's Marilyn Geewax also provides an explainer., We'll update this post with the latest, so make sure to refresh the page.
Related: What America Spends On Groceries, Out of every $100 American consumers spend, about $1 goes to alcohol. That hasn't changed much over the past 30 years., But where we spend our money on alcohol has changed quite a bit. We spend a bigger chunk of our booze money in bars and restaurants. We spend less money buying alcohol at the store to drink at home., Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, That doesn't necessarily mean we go out more often. Adjusted for inflation, the price of alcohol we buy at the store has gone down. The price of alcohol at bars has gone way up., Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, This isn't particularly surprising. Over time, you expect productivity gains and falling prices in manufactured goods. But a bartender today can't make drinks any faster than a bartender 30 years ago. In other words, there haven't been major productivity gains at bars. When a sector lags in productivity growth, it tends to have increasing prices. (This study has more on this idea.), BONUS GRAPHIC: Of the money we spend drinking at home, more goes to wine and less goes to hard alcohol. The percentage of our booze dollar that goes to beer hasn't changed much., Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR
Many economists are predicting Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke and his fellow policymakers will continue to depress long-term rates., Many economists are predicting Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke and his fellow policymakers will continue to depress long-term rates., The Federal Reserve the nation's central bank will end its two-day meeting on Wednesday by offering its assessment of the economy, and then declaring its latest plan for making things better., Investors all over the world will be waiting to hear just how weak or not the Fed thinks the U.S. economy is. And they will be watching to see whether the bankers plan to continue trying to stimulate growth by extending two controversial programs, one known as Operation Twist, and the other as quantitative easing., Some economists believe those programs have encouraged lending and held down interest rates firmly enough to prop up the economy during an unusually hard time. But others say the Fed already has gone too far in pushing down rates while infusing money into the banking system. They argue that Fed actions are too aggressive and will set the stage for a surge of inflation in the not-distant future., Many economists are predicting Fed policymakers will continue intervening to depress long-term rates rather than reversing course. That's because a new economic slowdown may be taking hold, especially one tied to the financial crisis in Europe, according to these experts., June 20, 2012, The Fed will show its concern that the economy continues to underperform, said Paul Edelstein, U.S. economist for IHS Global Insight, a forecasting firm. While he does not expect the Fed to unveil any dramatic new programs, he does assume it will extend current efforts aimed at pressing down on long-term yields., Unfortunately, understanding exactly what the Fed is planning is never easy. The bankers often speak a language the rest of us have never heard. Today at 2:15 EDT, Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke will hold a press conference to try to better explain what the bankers are trying to do., To follow along better, listeners should be familiar with three key terms: monetary policy, Operation Twist and QE3. Here are the definitions and pronunciations so that you can practice using the terms in conversations, should you find yourself sitting next to an economist., The economy is greatly influenced by two sets of policies, one dealing with fiscal issues and the other with monetary matters. Fiscal policy involves government taxes and spending and it's set by Congress. Monetary policy involves money and the banking system, and it's set by the Fed., Once Fed officials determine what their monetary policy ought to be, they implement it by manipulating the amount of money in the banking system. The steps they take set the direction for interest rates, which in turn can influence inflation and employment levels., Under Bernanke's leadership, the current policymakers have said they want U.S. inflation to run at about 2 percent a year. At the same time, they want interest rates to be pushed down and held steady at low levels to help businesses expand and consumers to buy homes and cars., Critics say that when the Fed acts too aggressively to boost lending either by squeezing down interest rates or expanding the supply of money it sets the stage for a big burst of inflation. Also, many retirees are discouraged by the extremely low interest rates they have been getting on their savings. A recent Wells Fargo/Gallup poll found that 1 in 3 investors says low rates have forced him to delay retirement., But Fed supporters say low-interest-rate efforts have allowed the economy to dodge a full-blown depression, while helping ensure that U.S. banks are among the world's strongest., To make its monetary-policy decisions, the Fed holds eight scheduled meetings a year. Typically, the gatherings last two days and conclude with an announcement about any policy changes. The central bank's overarching goal is to keep the U.S. economy growing at a steady, sustainable pace with low inflation and robust job creation., Fed policymakers are worried the U.S. economy is still failing to create enough jobs. They especially would like to see the housing market strengthen and construction employment perk up. To help with that, they have been trying to keep interest rates low so that more homebuyers could qualify for mortgages., Last fall, the Fed set out to push down on mortgage rates by launching Operation Twist, a strategy wherein the Fed would sell $400 billion worth of its own shorter-term bonds and use those proceeds to purchase longer-term bonds. That's a twist that helps screw down long-term rates, such as those on mortgages. Economists expect the Fed to extend the expiring operation, and keep twistin' the night away., This term refers to a Fed strategy that effectively adds money to the economy and encourages lending., The Q stands for quantitative; the E stands for easing (pumping more cash into the banking system). And the 3 may stand for Hail Mary, because the Fed has already tried this quantitative easing strategy twice., The central bank's goal is to encourage lending. If businesses could borrow more, they could afford to hire workers and buy new equipment. To get more cash moving through the economy, the Fed injects a predetermined quantity of money into banks. When banks have an expanded pool of cash available, they can send it back out in the form of loans., Critics say banks have failed to boost their lending as much as they should have, given the extraordinary help from the Fed.
JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon during testimony today before the House Financial Services Committee., JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon during testimony today before the House Financial Services Committee., The top news from Capitol Hill testimony today by JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon is that he says the bank did its best to fully inform investors about its risk strategy several weeks before it suffered a $2 billion-plus trading loss, The Associated Press reports., But the quote from him that seems to be getting the most attention came in response to a question from Rep. Sean Duffy, R-Wis., who wanted to know if the bank could ever lose a half a trillion dollars or a trillion dollars?, Not unless this earth is hit by a moon, Dimon quipped., Rep. Sean Duffy and JPMorgan CEO Jamie Dimon, Some of our earlier coverage of the JPMorgan news:, &mdash; JPMorgan Execs Who Bungled Billions May Have To Return Bonuses, Stock., &mdash; Dimon Will Tell Congress JPMorgan 'Let People Down' With Trading Loss., &mdash; JPMorgan Knew Of Risks, 'WSJ' Reports., &mdash; As Feared, JPMorgan's Losses Are Growing; Reportedly At $3 Billion.
The JS Roundhouse Mids., The JS Roundhouse Mids., Sneakers that come with prison orange shackles to wrap around your ankles?, That was Adidas' idea for the JS Roundhouse Mids it planned to start selling in August. It was to be a sneaker ... so hot you lock your kicks to your ankles., Was to be, that is., As CNN writes this morning, the German company has now canceled its plan to sell those sneakers after they generated significant criticism on Adidas' Facebook page., Adidas has issued a somewhat standard-style apology, CNN adds:, The design of the JS Roundhouse Mid is nothing more than the designer Jeremy Scott's outrageous and unique take on fashion and has nothing to do with slavery, the statement said. We apologize if people are offended by the design and we are withdrawing our plans to make them available in the marketplace., Among those who were highly critical of Adidas was Rev. Jesse Jackson. In a statement, he said:, The attempt to commercialize and make popular more than 200 years of human degradation, where blacks were considered three-fifths human by our Constitution is offensive, appalling and insensitive. Removing the chains from our ankles and placing them on our shoes is no progress. ... These slave shoes are odious and we as a people should be called to resent and resist them., Other products that have caused offense recently include, you may recall, Schweddy Balls. Foods are ripe for causing folks to cringe, as BuzzFeed has noted., Update at 11:50 a.m. ET. How Did We Forget 'Five Wives' Vodka?, Drink Up! Idaho OKs 'Five Wives' Vodka.
San Mateo, Calif.: Construction was underway earlier this year at a new housing development., San Mateo, Calif.: Construction was underway earlier this year at a new housing development., There was a 7.9 percent jump in the number of construction permits issued to home builders in May, the Census Bureau says., That increase boosted permits to a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 780,000 the most since September 2008, The Associated Press adds. It's a signal that construction will be strong in coming months., And there's another sign in the Census report that the housing sector may have picked up some strength: There was a 3.2 percent rise in the number of single-family home starts last month. Census says construction began on 516,000 such homes (that's another seasonally adjusted annual rate)., The increase in construction of single-family homes wasn't enough to keep all types of housing starts on the rise, however. A 24.2 percent plunge in the volatile apartments sector pulled starts down overall by 4.8 percent., Still, as Ameriprise Financial senior economist Russell Price tells Bloomberg News, the report was a lot better than the headline number [overall starts] would suggest.
The Spanish flag blowing in the wind in Madrid earlier this month., The Spanish flag blowing in the wind in Madrid earlier this month., Today's developments in Europe's financial crisis focus mainly on Spain:, &mdash; The Wall Street Journal writes that Spain, on the edge of losing debt market access, paid around 2 percentage points more in interest rates Tuesday than a month ago to lure investors to its Treasury bill sale, an ominous sign ahead of a critical government bond auction Thursday., &mdash; According to The Financial Times, the spike in Spain's borrowing costs came amid economists' predictions that it would need a full international bailout for its struggling economy., Meanwhile, Bloomberg News says, emerging countries boosted their pledges to the [International Monetary Fund's] global firewall, nearly doubling the fund's resources to $456 billion, at a G-20 summit in Mexico dominated by the global effort to restore confidence in the euro. ... 'There is concern that the firewall available may not be adequate to deal with contagion,' Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh said at the summit. 'The resources currently expected to be mobilized by Europe and the IMF are less than was estimated a year ago, and the crisis is actually more serious.' , As for Wall Street and the effect of all this on American markets, according to Bloomberg: U.S. stock futures swung between gains and losses [today] as Greek leaders said they will form a group to renegotiate the terms of the country's bailout and as the Federal Reserve begins its two-day monetary policy meeting., Speaking of Greece, Joanna Kakissis tells our Newscast Desk that leaders there say they could form a coalition government to run the troubled eurozone country as early as today., Some related posts by our friends at Planet Money:, &mdash; Episode 378: How Spain Created A Banking Monster., &mdash; Spain's Bank Matchmaker On What Went Wrong., &mdash; Why Germany Keeps Saying No., &mdash; Another All-Downside-No-Upside Weekend For Europe.
Portland, Ore., imposes two different fare structures on taxis and other kinds of short-trip vehicles. Two town car companies say those different rules are unconstitutional., With just over a half-million residents, Portland, Ore., is not exactly a major metropolis. In this bike- and mass-transit-friendly city, there are typically more bikes and buses plying the downtown streets than taxis and town cars., So when Mike Porter wanted to drum up business for his town car company, he did what a lot of businesses do: He took out a Groupon ad, offering a discounted fare to or from the airport., We thought it was a great idea to get our name out there to the metro area, Porter says. It was a huge success. We got over 600 ... rides based off this one promotion., But Porter also got something he didn't expect a letter from the city of Portland, that we were fined over $600,000, because we had broken the rule that we had to charge at least $50 or 35 percent higher than what taxis charge, he says., That's because Portland, like Houston and Miami, requires limousines and town cars to charge more for rides than cabs., Porter did not have to pay the fine in the end he just refunded all of the coupons instead. But he thinks the fare minimum rule is unfair, and, with a Portland-area limo company, has filed a lawsuit in the hope of overturning it., It's unconstitutional for the city of Portland to say ... that we have to charge the citizen more money because they want to protect one class of business, Porter says., Not Just Businesses, The city of Portland won't comment on the lawsuit. But Red Diamond, a cab driver who's worked in Portland for two decades, says there's a reason for the regulations. Taxis aren't just businesses, he says they're part of the city's transportation system. We get drunks off the road, we provide emergency roadside response, Diamond says. And we are, in many cases, the primary sources of mobility for people who otherwise don't drive themselves. And city regulations ensure that cabs are always available, for all kinds of riders, Diamond says., They're required by law to operate 24 hours a day, seven days week, 365 days a year, citywide, Diamond says. Taxis are required ... to maintain 10 percent of their fleet in wheelchair access vehicles. Taxis are also required to service all trips including short trips that are otherwise economic washouts for the drivers. But those short trips and late-night shifts come at a cost. A recent study from Portland's Revenue Bureau found that the city's drivers net well below minimum wage. But the study pointed to other factors that hinder drivers' pay, as well a glut of drivers, limited permits and high payments back to the drivers' parent companies., The Hamburger Comparison, Some cab drivers, like David Aguilar, think that restrictions on limos and town cars are not the solution., If McDonald's decides to sell a hamburger for 75 cents, Burger King cannot go over there and sue them [just] because [Burger King is] selling their hamburger for $2, Aguilar argues., Nor can Burger King tell the city to force McDonald's to sell its burger for a higher price, he says., But cab drivers like Diamond say that the city's minimum fare rules are a necessary part of protecting the taxi industry. And without them, he says, it's harder to serve those low-fare rides to elderly people who go out for groceries or people traveling short distances for medical appointments. , And if the town cars run roughshod over this industry, they take only the airport runs, and they leave us to kind of pick up the bread crumbs, as it were, Diamond says. That's not a good model for serving the needs of the community., Town car owner Mike Porter disagrees. This does not protect the citizen at all. This only protects taxicab companies and their profit, he says. What we're trying to do is just be able to advertise our services at a discounted rate to be able to show people, 'Hey, you have options other than just taxis.' , The city of Portland has until July 24 to respond to the complaint.
Summer travelers face higher gas prices and what seems like ever-increasing airfares., Summer travelers face higher gas prices and what seems like ever-increasing airfares., Across the U.S., temperatures are creeping higher, kids are out of school and the days are longer. This can only mean that summer is upon us., For many, summer also means travel season. Whether you're traveling by plane, train or automobile for that vacation, you're likely to feel the pinch of rising travel costs., If you've checked air travel recently, you will surely have noticed the increase in prices and fees even for domestic trips. The rising costs are mostly for all the usual reasons: fluctuating fuel costs and decreased domestic capacity. But according to Nicholas Kralev, author of the book Decoding Air Travel, airlines charge such fares for a simple reason., Because they can, Kralev tells weekends on All Things Considered guest host Jacki Lyden. Airfare is now based on demand and supply ... very often if you fly very short distances, you do end paying a lot of money., This is because airlines can afford to bump up the prices, Kralev says, as supply is limited., According to industry trade publication Airlines For America, average ticket prices are actually lower than they were in the 1970s when adjusted for inflation. But Kralev says this is misleading since published fares don't include the taxes, fees and extra costs associated with air travel., [A] second bag to go to Europe is $100, he says. How is that cheaper?, Kralev says summer travelers can try and combat these costs by subscribing to fare alerts to inform them of price drops. They can also look for flights that might include out-of-the-way routes. It might take a little longer to get to your destination, he says, but those flights can sometimes cost half as much., Hitting The Road, If higher airfare costs have you turned off from traveling by air, you might be thinking about packing up the car and taking to the open highways., While it's certainly cheaper than air travel, you'll still have the higher prices at the gas pump to contend with (though the average price of gas is nearly 20 cents less than a month ago). But that's not the only thing to consider when planning your road trip., Congress remains deadlocked over a new highway bill and there's a faint hope it will reach an agreement before the current bill funding transportation projects expires at the end of the month. With no agreement, highway projects across the nation will grind to a halt this summer., As NPR's Brian Naylor reports, it wasn't too long ago that the highway bill was something all lawmakers Republicans and Democrats could agree on. That was before the bridge to nowhere gave earmarks a bad name and some conservatives started questioning whether the federal government should even be in the infrastructure business., Now, the highway bill is stalled, putting projects like road repaving and bridge restorations on hold in many states., The Senate has passed a two-year, $109 billion measure, but the House was unable to agree on bill. Republican leaders refuse to bring the Senate version to the floor., If lawmakers can't agree on a bill by the end of the month, as seems likely, congressional leaders are expected to pass another temporary measure in order to fund projects until after the November election., Riding The Rails, So if the roads are too bumpy, why not get off the road and go by rail. Unfortunately, rail travel is simply not what it used to be., To understand what's happened to rail travel, you have to go back a bit to the National Railroad Passenger Corp. It was established under President Nixon when it looked like the golden days of U.S. railroads were fading., Essentially, it was a government takeover of what was left of the passenger rail industry. It was quickly rebranded though to what we now know as Amtrak., It was an attempt by the federal government to make sure that the passenger rail network, which was very robust in the years before World War II, but which was facing steady decline, was still available in many metropolitan areas, says Robert Puentes, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution., Amtrak was supposed to be a short-term fix, Puentes says. Rail travel was basically on life support at the time, with 75 percent of passenger-train mileage having disappeared between 1958 and the early 1970s., Amtrak still runs most of the rail travel in the U.S., but improvements to speed and new destinations has been slow going., In his 2010 State of the Union address, President Obama praised investment in the nation's high-speed rail program. But newly elected governors in Florida, Ohio and Wisconsin all rejected funds for high-speed rail projects, putting the future of rail travel in those states on indefinite hold., Improving Infrastructure, Much of the travel infrastructure in the U.S. was built at a time when the population was about 50 million people less than it is today. One needs only to travel during a holiday to see how congested both the roadways and airlines have become., All is not lost, however. Puentes tells NPR's Lyden that though movement in Washington has slowed, state governments and metropolitan areas are taking steps to improve travel at the local level., You do see a lot of innovation, he says. Governors in Michigan and Virginia and in other states ... are starting to look very differently at their transportation network [and] starting to see investments in transit and some other technological innovations., If successful at the local level, he says, perhaps the federal government will follow their lead.
David DiBenedetto, the editor-in-chief of Garden &amp; Gun, holds an editorial meeting in the magazine's Charleston, S.C., offices., David DiBenedetto, the editor-in-chief of Garden &amp; Gun, holds an editorial meeting in the magazine's Charleston, S.C., offices., Garden &amp; Gun magazine bills itself as the Soul of the South. In five short years, the up-and-coming magazine has amassed a dedicated following and picked up critical acclaim., The cover of the summer issue of Garden &amp; Gun entices you to hit a Southern road. A smiling young woman in skinny white jeans, a straw hat and wayfarers tucked into her pocket appears ready to jump into a vintage red Mercedes roadster, top down all under a bright Carolina blue sky., Earlier this spring, Editor-in-Chief David DiBenedetto was cooking up the cover with his staff., I think there are three things that we need to think about: We gotta say roads, we gotta say summer and gotta say South, he told them., The wall of the magazine's Charleston, S.C., office is covered with shots of cars, beaches and beautiful women., DiBenedetto says every pitch does not necessarily have to involve a shotgun or a magnolia blossom., Don't judge it by its name, he says., The Magazine's Spirit, The Savannah, Ga., native spent 12 years in the New York publishing world before joining G&G;, as they call it. He says he instantly saw the appeal., This is a magazine that is about everything in the South that I love, he says. It's not just about being in the field, hunting or fishing; it's about culture, it's about art, it's about bourbon and BBQ. It was about everything that I truly missed., The magazine has a distinct feel with thick paper and vivid photography. It launched in 2007 with writer Pat Conroy on the cover, and counts among its contributors Roy Blount Jr., Clyde Edgerton and Julia Reed. Tom Brokaw once wrote a tribute to his bird dogs., The name Garden &amp; Gun comes from a now-defunct Charleston nightclub, popular in the 1970s. President and CEO Rebecca Darwin says it captures the spirit of the magazine., The 'garden' is really a metaphor for the land, she says, which is really what's at the heart of this whole magazine. And then the 'gun' is the sporting life, which is, of course, a key element of the magazine., The summer issue includes a recipe for strawberry moonshine-fried pies, a profile of Alabama folk artist Thornton Dial, Southern road trip pit stops, fly-fishing in South America and island hopping in Bermuda., A Southern Perspective, Darwin co-founded Garden &amp; Gun when she returned to South Carolina after a lengthy magazine career in New York, including a stint as publisher of The New Yorker., She saw an opening for a magazine showcasing fine Southern living one that could draw both women and men., I did want the magazine to appeal to a sophisticated, worldly person. And it's not to say that the person who reads G&G; doesn't read Conde Nast Traveler, or Vanity Fair or whatever it is, she says. But so many of those magazines do what they do really, really well, but most of their stories come out of the Northeast or the West Coast. And I do think that there is another world here., Charleston native Pierre Manigault was in search of content about that world., There was nothing out there that was a magazine for my daily lifestyle, he says., Manigault, chairman of the board of the Evening Post Publishing Co., is helped start Garden &amp; Gun., I think a lot of people have looked at the South as being a backwoods place, a backwater. Charleston's been a backwater since after the Civil War. And I think now it's really coming into a new golden age, he says. We've made it through the traumas of racism and integration. ... We have finally gotten past the Civil War. We've finally gotten past Reconstruction. It's a wonderful story to be told, that nobody was telling., By paying to join the Garden &amp; Gun club, members can attend events like a candlelight affair at the historic South Carolina Society Hall in Charleston as part of Garden &amp; Gun's Secret Society Supper Club., By paying to join the Garden &amp; Gun club, members can attend events like a candlelight affair at the historic South Carolina Society Hall in Charleston as part of Garden &amp; Gun's Secret Society Supper Club., The magazine appears to have appeal beyond Dixie. Some 45 percent of its subscribers live elsewhere., The 'G&G; Experience', Readership surged last year after Garden &amp; Gun picked up the National Magazine Award for General Excellence. Circulation is now about 260,000 readers a 73 percent jump since its inception., But the publication has not been immune to the struggles facing print media. Early on, it skipped an issue because of financial shortfalls., That's when Darwin decided to further tap her most loyal readers by offering them a way to live out the Garden &amp; Gun experience., By paying to join the Garden &amp; Gun club, members can attend events like a candlelight affair at the historic South Carolina Society Hall in Charleston., In the kitchen, renowned chef Joseph Lenn of Blackberry Farm in Tennessee arms waiters with tiles of local oysters. It's round one of a five-course meal he's preparing for Garden &amp; Gun's Secret Society Supper Club. Lenn is pleased to be associated with G&G;., I think that their magazine really kind of represents the South on a national level for people who always are like, 'What's so great about the South?' he says. And it's one of my favorite magazines. The classic cocktails, and food and traditions., Julie and Robert Hicks of Lexington, S.C., are new members to the Secret Society, but have been reading Garden &amp; Gun since Robert Hicks pilfered the first issue from a doctor's office., Julie Hicks says this magazine just goes deeper than other magazines geared to the South., Southern Living is like Coca-Cola and Garden &amp; Gun is like a good bourbon, Robert Hicks says., The G&G; clubs go on skeet shoots, mountain getaways and bourbon tastings. This fall, there's An Ode to Hemingway's Cuba at Sea Island, Ga., with tarpon fishing and cigar rolling., Whose South?, That upper-crust bent is disturbing to Marc Smirnoff, the editor of another southern magazine, the Oxford American., Garden &amp; Gun plays up the old South plantation fantasy the Gone With the Wind myth and they've just modernized it, put a price tag on it, he says. And it's grotesque because it doesn't represent the entire South., By not dealing head-on with politics, race or religion, Smirnoff says, Garden &amp; Gun whitewashes the South., In defense, DiBennedeto says Garden &amp; Gun is not about black or white, but telling good stories., I don't think once you've read this magazine that you can say that it doesn't have soul or that it's just a glorified South, he says. This magazine is about high and low., Best-selling author Rick Bragg of Alabama, who writes for Garden &amp; Gun, jokes that he represents the lowbrow., Admittedly, I'm not going to get on my horse and go chase a fox. ... I'm probably not going to do a lot of things that they cover for a more elite South, he says, but they also cover lost highways. They let me write about eating my first oyster., Bragg also contributes to Oxford American. He sees value in both magazines as a forum for Southern storytellers., I do greatly love writing about where I'm from, and I think that's why they draw so many Southern writers. We like writing about Mama, he says., And Garden &amp; Gun's readers pick up on that sense of pride in place.
Occupy Wall Street protesters joined with unions in New York on May 1, a traditional day of global protests in sympathy with unions and leftist politics., Occupy Wall Street protesters joined with unions in New York on May 1, a traditional day of global protests in sympathy with unions and leftist politics., For many full-time employees in the United States, the five-day work week, paid overtime and holidays are expected benefits. This wasn't always so, and many workers' benefits today are the achievements of labor unions., Just five decades ago, unions were on the frontline of the fight for the rights and wages of the middle class. But today, unions are on the decline., After World War II, organized labor represented a third of America's workforce. Today, only 12 percent of the overall workforce belongs to labor unions both public and private. About 37 percent of the public sector workforce belong to unions as opposed to only 7 percent in the private sector, but they're now in the cross hairs of cash-strapped states and cities., This month, Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker celebrated after winning a recall election that was triggered when he curtailed public union collective bargaining. Similar anti-union efforts took place in Indiana and Ohio., Voters in Ohio later repealed a law that would limit collective bargaining for some public-sector unions, but unions in many states are still at odds with government. So if unions decline, where does that leave the middle class?, The Power Of Unions, Marcus Oladell, a 62-year-old from East Hartford, Conn., has been a bus driver in the area for about 15 years. Just 12 years ago, he helped form a union of school bus drivers with the Teamsters., Since unionizing, he tells weekends on All Things Considered guest host Jacki Lyden, starting wages for drivers have doubled to $16 an hour. Before unionizing, senior drivers were given raises of a just a nickel an hour., If they ever tried to give us a nickel raise now, we'd be walking, Oladell says. So we had no holidays, now we're up to eight a year. In our last contract, which we never had before, there was a longevity bonus given to members there for 10, 15 and 20 years., While the workers are not getting rich, Oladell says, no one could argue the unions have raised the standards compared to what they had just 12 years ago., Oladell became shop steward of his local for the Teamsters. He now travels across the country helping organize bus yards like his., The generation behind us has to get an understanding of how powerful a union can be, he says. If that middle class is going to be strong, it has to be represented by unions., Unions And The Middle Class, Middle class wages, at least for the majority of people, are the invention of American unions, says Harold Meyerson, a political columnist for The Washington Post and an editor-at-large at The American Prospect. He says if big labor dies, then America's middle class dies with it., In a recent column, Meyerson points to the decades after World War II, a time of shared prosperity, when productivity and median household income both increased by over 100 percent. It was also a time of peak unionization., This had an effect on non-union workers as well, Meyerson tells Lyden. Non-union workers in industries that were heavily unionized, ... their employers had to compete with union employers. This raised wages for everyone., As unions have declined, Meyerson says, the average wage in some sectors has fallen in some cases dramatically. In the auto industry, unionized jobs once paid upward of $28 an hour. He says workers in both union and non-union plants are now hired at about $13 to $15 an hour, and in some cases can't earn more than $19 an hour., Without a middle class helped by unions, Meyerson says, the U.S. would continue down a path of massive inequality of wealth and low levels of mobility., People are not moving up the economic ladder now, he says. We would have real decline in wealth because people's income isn't keeping up, so most of their wealth is in their homes ... [and] people have lost two decades worth of value on their homes. We would have a really strapped middle class., This, in fact, is what we have now, he says., Tough Choices For Cities, Public-sector unions have grown as cities and the demand for services has expanded. That's where the crisis comes in, especially as the economy has fallen., On the same day as the tumultuous recall vote in Wisconsin, two California cities San Diego and San Jose were voting on measures to force city workers to pay more for their pensions. In San Jose, Democratic Mayor Chuck Reed took on the unions., Reed pushed for a new law requiring workers to pay more for their pensions. He estimates that in the first year the measure would save the city about $25 million a year, but it would eventually save billions in the long run. It passed resoundingly, but the unions say in a lawsuit that the measure is anti-union., As a member of the traditionally pro-labor Democratic Party, Reed had to weigh the political consequences of his decision., I think this is a choice that is very difficult for Democrats to make, he tells Lyden. But it is a choice between providing services to the people or providing benefits to our employees., It's a choice Reed says all Democrats will be faced with as they deal with rising pension costs across the country., The Road Ahead, The way forward is difficult for cities and unions. Central Falls, R.I., a city in bankruptcy, got the state to help pay pensions owed to police and fire retirees. They faced losing as much as 55 percent of their benefits., Meyerson says it might be hard for people to have sympathy for union workers, even in public-sector jobs., It's a real problem since most private-sector workers have lost pensions of yore and have 401(k)s or nothing, he says, and they're asked to support others., One thing that is certain is that both public-sector and private unions will continue to be a topic for politicians during the next five months as we head toward a tumultuous Election Day.
The Karl Marx credit card., The German bank Sparkasse Chemnitz recently launched a Karl Marx credit card. The bank let people vote online for 10 different images, and Marx was the very clear winner, beating out a palace, a castle and a racetrack, among others. Reuters has more on the story., The card, obviously, needs a tagline. Post your suggestions in the comments, or tweet them with the tagline #marxcard. We'll post our favorites here.
Rajat Gupta on Wednesday as he arrived at the federal courthouse in Manhattan., Rajat Gupta on Wednesday as he arrived at the federal courthouse in Manhattan., Rajat Gupta, who reached the pinnacle of corporate America as managing partner of McKinsey &amp; Co. and was a director at Goldman Sachs Group Inc. and Procter &amp; Gamble, was convicted by a federal jury of leaking inside information to hedge-fund manager Raj Rajaratnam, Bloomberg News writes., The Associated Press recaps the case:, Gupta was charged last year in a far-reaching federal probe of alleged insider trading in the hedge fund industry. Prosecutors had accused him of giving his billionaire friend Raj Rajaratnam tips that Rajaratnam then used to gain an illegal advantage on massive trades for a hedge fund. The 63-year-old Gupta claimed all his business dealings were above board. His lawyers argued he was a victim of guilt by association with the hedge fund manager, who's now serving an 11-year prison., The AP adds that Gupta was specifically convicted of conspiracy and three counts of securities fraud. ... He was acquitted on two of the five counts of securities fraud., As WNYC's Ilya Marritz reported this week on All Things Considered, in one instance in September 2008, Gupta allegedly called his friend just seconds after a Goldman Sachs conference call had ended and minutes before the stock market closed to tell him that investor Warren Buffett was putting $5 billion into Goldman Sachs. Rajaratnam immediately bought $43 million worth of Goldman stock. The next day, the news became public, and Rajaratnam made a million-dollar profit, prosecutors say.
The European Central Bank is on standby to keep banks flush with liquidity if Greeks effectively vote on Sunday to support politicians who want to reject austerity measures and pull the nation out of the eurozone, The Financial Times writes this morning., The ECB joins a global chorus of central bankers pledging support ahead of Sunday's elections, the FT adds., Whether there will be a clear outcome on Sunday is uncertain, however. On Morning Edition, NPR's Sylvia Poggioli reported that no single party is expected to win an outright majority. The electorate is divided between those who will vote out of fear for the establishment New Democracy party, and those who find hope in the upstart leftist Syriza party, which vows to ditch the painful terms of Greece's financial bailout., Also today, The Associated Press looks at the ripple effects if Greek were to leave the euro. Observers think that if central banks can't manage the situation, the path of a full-blown crisis would start in Greece, quickly move to the rest of Europe and then hit the U.S. Stocks and oil would plunge, the euro would sink against the U.S. dollar, and big banks would uncover losses on complex trades.
In the car business, Lincoln once stood as the pinnacle of luxury. Frank Sinatra drove a Lincoln. So did the Shah of Iran. In the U.S., the presidential limo was a Lincoln., The brand peaked with the 1961 Lincoln Continental, a beautiful, innovative car that stood for style, individuality and sophistication., An ad for the 1965 Lincoln Continental., But after the '60s, Lincoln started on a long, slow decline that mirrored the slide of the American auto industry., Lincoln is owned by Ford, which has spent the past several years turning around its core brand. Now, the company's executives are taking on the daunting task of revitalizing Lincoln., Bringing back Lincoln is essential for Ford, not least because luxury brands are huge profit centers for car companies. They also lead to innovations that eventually make their way to cheaper cars. Anti-lock brakes, fuel injection and GPS all started in luxury brands., Jim Farley is the executive at Ford tasked with revitalizing Lincoln. Farley studied luxury brands that made a resurgence, such as Burberry, Gucci and Audi. Farley says he learned that we have innovated literally every piece of this the car, the brand, what people think of when they think of Lincoln., Lincoln's staking its future on this car., Lincoln's staking its future on this car., Farley is following a blueprint laid down by others. He hired a new ad agency. He's redesigning Lincoln dealerships. He poached Max Wolff, a top designer, from Cadillac. He has even physically separated Lincoln from Ford for the first time in more than a decade, Lincoln has its own design studio. Last summer the company killed off the Lincoln Town Car after more than 30 years., Most importantly, Lincoln is completely redesigning its lineup, starting with the MKZ. It has a huge retractable roof, along the lines of a hard-top convertible. And it looks very different from most cars on the road now., The new MKZ will hit the market this fall. It will be the first big test of whether Lincoln can get back its cool.
Tam Nguyen (center right) and his sister Linh run the Advance Beauty College in Garden Grove, Calif., Tam Nguyen (center right) and his sister Linh run the Advance Beauty College in Garden Grove, Calif., If you've had a manicure in California, odds are the person at the other end of the emery board was of Vietnamese heritage., Vietnamese immigrants now dominate California's nail-care industry and make up a significant percentage of all manicurists nationwide., The story began with a hurried immigration after the fall of Saigon almost four decades ago., Sparked by the interest of a group of refugees and the help of a Hollywood star, the demand for affordable manicures quickly became the foundation of the American dream for many Vietnamese newcomers., On The Job Market, Fast, It's graduation day at the Advance Beauty College in Garden Grove, Calif., and staff are quickly bundling piles of flowers into small bouquets for each graduate., About an hour's drive south of Los Angeles, Garden Grove is part of what's known as Little Saigon a segment of Orange County that has one of the country's largest Vietnamese populations., Tam Nguyen, the school's co-owner, proudly gives visitors a tour of the training floor. It's filled with dozens of young women chattering away in Vietnamese as they work on clients' hair and nails., Those customers come in for discounted services, enabling students to pile up the hours of practice required to receive their licenses., ABC also teaches cosmetology and massage, but Nguyen says most of ABC's students are studying manicuring., Filling A Niche, According to the industry magazine Nails, Vietnamese now make up 80 percent of the California's licensed manicurists, and about 45 percent of manicurists nationwide., A model shows off an ABC student's work. Most of the students are studying manicuring., A model shows off an ABC student's work. Most of the students are studying manicuring., Our school is unique in that we offer a large manicuring program, Nguyen says. Most private beauty colleges don't have one, just because, from an owner's perspective, the margins don't make sense., Instead, Nguyen says, most schools prefer to fill their slots with cosmetology students, whose tuition is significantly higher., Nguyen says his school, one of the biggest in the state, has become well-known among Vietnamese immigrants because it is designed to get them into the job market as quickly as possible no English required., We're one of the few schools in the country that actually teaches this in-language, Nguyen says. All of our manicuring instructors actually are bilingual, with Vietnamese as well as English., Nguyen is the second generation in his family to run ABC. His parents, Diem and Kien, fled Vietnam, where Diem had been a navy commander, after the fall of Saigon in 1975., When the family immigrated to the U.S., Diem reconnected with friends who had begun to make money as manicurists. He saw they were able to work for themselves with little capital outlay., Alfred Osborne, senior associate dean at the University of California, Los Angeles' Anderson School of Business, says the Nguyens are typical of ambitious new immigrants., Affordable nail care, Osborne said, was a niche just waiting to be identified and captured., The Help Of A Hollywood Star, The Vietnamese just happened to be the immigrant group that was willing to do anything, that was new to this country, Osborne says., Actress Tippi Hedren was instrumental in helping Vietnamese immigrants to California get started in the nail industry., Actress Tippi Hedren was instrumental in helping Vietnamese immigrants to California get started in the nail industry., And the suggestion for them to see this niche actually came from a Hollywood actress., That actress was Tippi Hedren, an elegant blond who starred in several of Alfred Hitchcock's movies in the 1960s., When she wasn't onscreen, Hedren was an international relief coordinator with the organization Food for the Hungry. After Saigon fell, she was working with Vietnamese women in a refugee camp near Sacramento when several admired her long, glossy nails., Hedren had a manicurist named Dusty at the time and asked her if she would come to the camp to meet with the women. Dusty agreed, and Hedren flew her up to Camp Hope every weekend to teach nail technology to 20 eager women., One of Dusty's students, Thuan Le, remains an in-demand manicurist at a posh salon in Los Angeles' wealthy Brentwood neighborhood., Le remembers Hedren insisting the new students learn the then-cutting-edge technique of silk nail wrapping, which created long, natural-looking artificial nails., [Hedren] said, 'I trained you to become a very special manicurist, not just plain manicurist ... because you make more money,' Le recalls., A Mother's Dream ..., Thanks to Hedren's sponsorship, Le became licensed and immediately employable. Fortunately, she landed a job at a critical time, when her husband, a former fighter pilot, was looking for work and the family desperately needed money., Today, the family is financially secure., I feel comfortable with my job, with the money I bring in to help my husband raise the children and the family, Le says., Le and her sister manicurists have transformed the nail business, which is projected to pull in some $7.3 billion this year. Today, affordable manicures have become so synonymous with the Vietnamese that Nails magazine offers a Vietnamese-language version., Le says the constant demand for affordable manicures has given a steady stream of Vietnamese nail technicians work across the country and the globe., Even, ironically, back in Vietnam. If you look around, you see they go everywhere and they start from California! Le says, laughing., And it's not just manicuring: Vietnamese merchants now supply a significant amount of materials and equipment for the industry. For instance, the largest global manufacturer of cuticle nippers is you guessed it Vietnamese., ... And A Son's, Le was a close friend of ABC founders Diem and Kien Nguyen, and the three reconnected in California. The Nguyens were inspired to get their own nail licenses after seeing how Le was able to support herself. Their successful school is the culmination of their dream., But Tam Nguyen says his mother's dreams went beyond economic self-sufficiency. Their American dream was for their son to be a physician and to bring honor, prestige and a great living, Tam says., Being a dutiful child, Tam went to medical school. But on graduation day, Nguyen handed his diploma to his parents and told them being a M.D. was their dream and running their beauty college was his., Looking back on that moment, Kien Nguyen winces., Well, yeah, of course most Vietnamese families, they want their kid to be a doctor, a lawyer, you know? she says. So, we are the same, we have only one son., But that son made his parents proud a different way, by training thousands of women to earn their own living. He also added an M.B.A. to his resume, a degree he puts to use running the business., Back at the graduation ceremony, Tam is addressing the ABC graduates., As you know, my sister Linh and I are second-generation owners at the beauty college, Tam tells the group. We've graduated over 25,000 over the years, and it always makes us very happy to see our graduates go on and become successful., Names are called, one by one, and finally, when all the diplomas are conferred, the students gather for the traditional hat toss., Their journey to their individual American dreams has started.
The number of unemployed Americans who filed first-time claims for jobless benefits rose by 6,000 last week from the week before, the Employment and Training Administration reported this morning., It says there were 386,000 first-time filings, up from a revised 380,000 (earlier, the agency had estimated there were 377,000 first-time clams in the week ended June 2)., Claims have basically been ranging between 360,000 and 400,000 a week since last fall. As Bloomberg News says, they're another sign the labor market is struggling to improve., Also this morning, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported that consumer prices fell 0.3 percent in May from April. The decline is not a surprise, given the sharp drop in gasoline prices recently. The bureau says its gasoline index dropped 6.8 percent last month., The morning's third economic indicator:, The U.S. current account trade deficit widened in the first three months to the largest imbalance since late 2008, reflecting a big increase in imports in oil, cars and machinery and a drop in U.S. earnings on overseas investments, The Associated Press writes. The Commerce Department says the deficit in the current account, the broadest measure of trade, jumped 15.7 percent to $137.3 billion, up from $118.7 billion in the final three months of last year.
A New Orleans newspaper stand holds copies of Wednesday's Times-Picayune, which announced layoffs for 200 employees., A New Orleans newspaper stand holds copies of Wednesday's Times-Picayune, which announced layoffs for 200 employees., What happens when a media company wants to take away your daily newspaper? In New Orleans, you take to the streets., A recent rally to preserve daily publication of the Times-Picayune featured high-profile musicians including Kermit Ruffins, whose sang a jazzy tune invoking the name of the 175-year-old paper. It's part of a campaign launched by New Orleans' most prominent residents and powerful leaders to save the Times-Picayune, a cultural institution in a city that gives high credence to tradition., It's a morning ritual, said Constable Lambert Boissiere, a former city councilman and state senator. You know, you get the paper, get your cup of coffee, have you a little breakfast or whatever, paging through the articles you want to read. Then you had the conversations at lunch about the things you read in the paper., So that's going to be gone, Boissiere said. I can't imagine myself and my friends sitting in front of the computer every morning, going through the different sections to read the articles. I don't see that happening., The cuts at the paper are part of a restructuring by Advance Publications, a Newhouse company, that will shift to three-day print editions and an emphasis on online news., But more than a third of New Orleans residents don't have Internet access, raising questions about how poorer and older citizens will keep up with news or even the local obituaries. Rituals aside, Boissiere said, the timing is terrible., We finally cleaned up our act since Katrina. We got business coming back. Our athletics things, with the Hornets and the Saints, we got a Super Bowl, we had Final Four, everything, he said. We're getting to be a big city again. And then to lose a daily paper, I think it's a bad signal affecting the growth of the city., Concerned civic leaders have banded together to put pressure on Newhouse to rethink its plan., An Industry-Wide Problem, New Orleans Mayor Mitch Landrieu said the city's reputation is at stake., You know, if you go from seven days to three days, you look like a minor league city, he said., Jim Amoss, the Times-Picayune's editor and a native New Orleanian, said he grasps the grief over what people think will no longer be there., He said the organization will continue to do justice by the community., I know these are just words at this point, he said. Our intention is to preserve the news report, investigative journalism, our chasing after corruption in Louisiana., Amoss said economic upheaval in the news industry is something that every regional newspaper must confront., The one way we've chosen not to come to terms with it is by simply atrophying, by watching our print ad revenue, which is still strong, erode year by year as it will and as it has, and by having to chop off limb by limb of our newsgathering strength without having any strategy going forward, he said., But if this week's layoffs are any indication 200 in New Orleans and 400 in Alabama (at the Advance-owned Birmingham News, the Huntsville Times and the Mobile Press Register) more than a few limbs have been amputated., The Watchdog Role, A kayak used by Times-Picayune photographer John McCusker to cover Hurricane Katrina is displayed at the Newseum in Washington, D.C., in 2010. McCusker, who worked for the paper for 25 years, is being laid off., A kayak used by Times-Picayune photographer John McCusker to cover Hurricane Katrina is displayed at the Newseum in Washington, D.C., in 2010. McCusker, who worked for the paper for 25 years, is being laid off., John McCusker, who has been a staff photographer at the Times-Picayune since 1986, lost his job in the restructuring., The main thing is I'm sad for this city, he said outside a local bar where laid-off workers met to commiserate. You take away the Times-Picayune, and there are a bunch of police officers that were on the Danziger Bridge that would still be on the streets today., You take away the Times-Picayune, and Aaron Broussard would still be president of Jefferson Parish. The watchdog role of this newspaper cannot be underestimated., McCusker was talking about how reporters exposed corrupt politicians and even a police plot to cover up civilian killings after Hurricane Katrina. The paper's storm coverage earned a Pulitzer Prize., Holding Out Hope, Restaurateur Ralph Brennan is part of a group of Times-Picayune advertisers considering whether to pull their spending in protest. He's disheartened by the list of seasoned journalists who are leaving, including the paper's restaurant critic, Brett Anderson., They have an outstanding staff, many of them who've been there a long time. Brett Anderson is one of them. And Brett has a national reputation, he said. He's very well-respected in the food journalism community, and to lose him is a great loss. And this is a food city!, Brennan's restaurants are serving special drinks like Picayune Punch, with a portion of proceeds going to help those who lost their jobs., He and other business leaders are now looking for alternatives., I keep hoping that somebody, an entrepreneur out there, will find a way to get us some daily news and maybe build a newspaper, he said., Three-day publication is set to take effect in the fall.
The housing market is finally showing signs of a comeback, according to an annual study from Harvard. But, though mortgage interest rates are at record lows, banks are often too cautious to lend., The housing market is finally showing signs of a comeback, according to an annual study from Harvard. But, though mortgage interest rates are at record lows, banks are often too cautious to lend., Amid all the economic uncertainty over the credit crisis in Europe and slow job growth in the U.S., one sector may be looking up. The U.S. housing market is finally showing more signs of recovery, according to a report being released Thursday by Harvard University., Harvard comes out with this study once a year, and this time around, it's painting a much brighter picture., Eric Belsky, the managing director of the Harvard Joint Center for Housing Studies, says a few years ago, in order to get people to buy houses, the government had to entice them with a big homebuyer tax credit., When you think about what life was like, jobs were being lost to the rate of 700,000 per month, the stock market was still falling, and yet people came out of their bunkers to buy homes because they thought it was a good deal to be able to get cash from the federal government, he says., Now, the economy is gaining at least some jobs every month. Home prices in many areas have stopped falling. In some places, they've started to rise. So more Americans are deciding all on their own that it's a good time to buy., 'Beginning To Turn A Page', We're seeing existing home sales have been up for 10 months in a row, Belsky says. We've seen prices bottom out. All of this suggests that housing is beginning to turn a page, and the only thing that would make the page turn back again is if the broader economy goes off the rails., But so far, Belsky says, people are slowly getting more confident., Think about how careful people are moving back into the market when prices have fallen this much, he says. You know, the opportunity to potentially buy at or near the bottom of a cycle is great. And I think people are beginning to appreciate that., Prices by one measure are down 35 percent nationally. Interest rates are at record lows. Meanwhile, the cost of renting a house or apartment has been rising. When you compare the cost of owning versus the cost of renting, it hasn't looked this good in 40 to 50 years, Belsky says., Recent surveys show that despite the housing crash, the vast majority of Americans still aspire to own a home if they don't own one already., But many people don't have the resources to buy a home. Unemployment is still above 8 percent. Millions more Americans are underemployed., Are Lenders Too Cautious?, We have this tantalizing statistic out there about how affordable homeownership is, says Chris Herbert, a Harvard research director who worked on the housing report. But you still have to have sufficient income, sufficient credit, sufficient savings., And many in the industry feel that after all the crazy lending during the housing bubble, credit now has gotten too tight., I am extremely concerned today about an overcorrection in the credit markets the avoidance of risk by the lenders across the country that we depend on to extend credit to American families, says David Stevens, president of the Mortgage Bankers Association. He'll be speaking Thursday at a news conference when the Harvard study is officially released., Stevens represents those lenders, but he's still concerned that they're being too cautious. And that could mean that this slow and painful trudge out of recession will be longer and more painful than it needs to be., We shouldn't create a blockade that eliminates well-qualified families who want to own a home to raise their family from gaining access to homeownership, and I think that's the tipping point that we're facing right now, Stevens says., He says that with new regulations still taking shape in Washington, banks face a lot of uncertainty about what will happen if a loan they make today goes bad five years down the road. So he's hoping regulators come up with smart and clear rules that will encourage lending.
JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon during his testimony today on Capitol Hill., JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon during his testimony today on Capitol Hill., Along with saying, again, that his bank let a lot of people down when it lost more than $2 billion, JPMorgan Chase CEO Jamie Dimon added this prediction during his testimony before the Senate Banking Committee this morning:, It's likely that there will be clawbacks., Translation: The bank will move to recover stocks and bonuses paid to the executives responsible for the losses it suffered because of some risky trades that went very bad., According to The Associated Press, under bank policy, Dimon said, stock and bonuses can be recovered from executives, even for exercising bad judgment. The policy has never been invoked, he said., Dimon's prepared testimony is posted here., The AP adds that the start of the hearing was delayed by demonstrators in the room who shouted about stopping foreclosures. Another demonstrator shouted, 'Jamie Dimon's a crook. At least a dozen people were escorted from the hearing room.
Wholesale prices fell 1 percent in May from April thanks to an 8.9 percent plunge in the price of gasoline, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reports. The overall decrease is the largest in one month since July 2009., Excluding the energy and sectors, prices at the wholesale level ticked up 0.2 percent., Also this morning, the Census Bureau says that retail sales edged down 0.2 percent in May from April. There's a link between that figure and the drop in gasoline prices: The value of sales at gas stations dropped 2.2 percent in May, largely because of the steep drop in gas prices., As Bloomberg News notes, spending increased 0.9 percent at clothing stores and 0.8 percent at electronics chains.
A Federal Reserve study showing that Americans lost wealth in the Great Recession turned up another, perhaps more surprising, result: Credit card debt fell sharply., The percentage of families using credit cards for borrowing dropped over the period; the median balance on their accounts fell 16.1 percent between 2007 and 2010, the report concluded., The data appeared Monday in the Survey of Consumer Finances, a widely followed source of information about the financial condition of American families., The Fed study turned up two particularly dismal measures of financial health:, 1) Median family income fell 7.7 percent, to $45,800 in 2010 from $49,600 in 2007., 2) Median family net worth fell 38.8 percent, to $77,300 in 2010 from $126,400 in 2007., So if income and net worth were tumbling, wouldn't people have been borrowing more to put food on the table and shoes on the kids?, To the contrary, the decreased prevalence of credit card debt outstanding was widespread and noticeable across most of the demographic groups, the Fed study found., Source: Federal Reserve Board's Survey of Consumer Finances, Credit: Angela Wong / NPR, Translating from Fed-speak to English, that means just about everyone owed less on their credit cards., Back in 2007, 46.1 percent of families had credit card debt, with a median balance of $3,100. In 2010, after the Great Recession had flattened families' finances, only 39.4 percent had credit card balances, with a median balance of $2,600., While it's encouraging to see families carrying less debt, economists say the improvements don't reflect good news, such as a surge of income for paying off bills. Rather, the decline shows lots of people filed for bankruptcy to clear out their old debts., Source: U.S. Courts, Credit: Kevin Uhrmacher / NPR, People took on too much debt, says Nigel Gault, chief U.S. economist for IHS Global Insight. Then when they lost jobs in the recession, many of them headed to bankruptcy court. They defaulted and the debt just got wiped out, he says., Seeing all of those bankruptcy filings, lenders became much less willing to dish out credit cards. Lenders are being much more careful now, Gault says., And so are consumers. So many people lost their jobs in the recession or saw family members and neighbors lose paychecks that they have become less willing to run up their credit cards, he said. Everyone has become less willing to take on debt, Gault says., There's a hint of a silver lining. Now that credit card debt has been reduced, many consumers may be in better shape to bounce back in coming years. Wiping out old debts was just something that had to be done before we could move forward, Gault says.
The most important reason Americans save money: To have something salted away for a rainy day., When researchers asked people the most important reason they save money, building an emergency fund finished slightly ahead of retirement and way ahead of everything else., Source: Federal Reserve, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, This raises a second question: How much do you need in a rainy day fund?, Lucky for us, the researchers asked this question as well. Not surprisingly, people with higher incomes said they needed a bigger emergency fund., But up and down the income spectrum, people said a rainy day fund should be between 9 percent and 14 percent of their annual income., Source: Federal Reserve, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, In other words, most people think they need a bit more than a month's worth of income saved up for a rainy day., The findings come from a report the Federal Reserve released yesterday. For more on the report, see our post from yesterday looking at the decline in wealth for American households., Planet Money Question of the Day: How much do you think you should have saved for a rainy day? (Also: How much do you actually have in your rainy-day fund?)
At any gathering of business owners, you're likely to hear about how hard it is to fill jobs because of a skills gap., Lots of employers say they want to hire welders, software engineers, nurses, oil-field workers and so many others, but can't find applicants with the right talents and education., But Peter Cappelli, a professor of management at the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School and director of its Center for Human Resources, says these complaints are largely bunk., Rather than continue to whine, employers might ask themselves whether it might pay to perhaps provide some training? Capelli told Tell Me More, host Michel Martin today., Cappelli recently published Why Good People Can't Get Jobs. He argues that employers should stop blaming the educational system, and start rethinking their hiring practices., He notes that ManpowerGroup, the staffing company, says more than half of employers surveyed say they are having difficulty filling positions because of skills shortages. But the real problem is, he argues, is that they are searching for the perfect candidate., Cappelli concedes that in light of the nation's high unemployment rate (8.2 percent in May), it's not surprising employers are picky. They get so many applications that they have computerized the screening process, and search only for key words, such as Ph.D or years of experience. It's yes-no-yes-no. Did you clear the hurdle?, he said., Also, application forms typically ask job seekers to name the wages they want. If you guess too high, you get kicked out of the automated screening process, even though you might be open to a lower wage, he said., Unless you can describe your skills to perfectly match exactly what the computer software has been set to find, your application will get kicked out, he said., In the end, when an employer simply cannot find anyone to fill a job, he should stop blaming the applicants and recognize: You're just not paying enough, Cappelli said., Much more from Michel's conversation with Cappelli is on today's Tell Me More. Click here to find an NPR station that broadcasts or streams the show.
Some top JPMorgan Chase executives and directors were alerted to risky practices by a team of London-based traders two years before that group's botched bets cost the bank more than $2 billion, The Wall Street Journal is reporting., The Journal says it reached that conclusion after interviews with more than a dozen current and former members of the bank's Chief Investment Office, the unit responsible for the losses., And it adds that last year, top CIO executives set a plan to roll back a separate set of large London trades only to learn later that the plan hadn't been followed correctly., This news comes one day before JPMorgan CEO Jamie Dimon is due before the Senate Banking Committee, which has scheduled a hearing on A Breakdown in Risk Management: What Went Wrong at JPMorgan Chase?, As we've previously reported, the banks losses on the bets were initially estimated at $2 billion but have been growing., Monday, Reuters columnist David Cay Johnston looked at JPMorgan's experiment with hedginess a play on Stephen Colbert's truthiness.
Bob Davis hand-dips mugs before they go into the kiln at American Mug and Stein in East Liverpool, Ohio. Most overseas companies have machines that can do this much faster., Bob Davis hand-dips mugs before they go into the kiln at American Mug and Stein in East Liverpool, Ohio. Most overseas companies have machines that can do this much faster., For decades, when you slid into a booth at a diner or a local coffee shop, the waitress probably arrived with a standard-issue, off-white mug. More than likely that mug came from the Ohio River town of East Liverpool, which calls itself The Pottery Capital of the Nation., A lot of that city's pottery business is long gone. Now, one of the few remaining pottery factories in the battered town is pinning its survival on a major corporation., To step inside American Mug and Stein in East Liverpool is to step into another era., About 20 employees dressed in dust-covered aprons are here in a hot, dark plant under bare overhead light bulbs and swirling metal fans. They're pouring clay into heavy molds, smoothing the mugs' edges and dipping them in glaze. There's no automated assembly line or high-tech machinery here., Owner Clyde McClellan is firing up one of the company's 30-year-old kilns., It's a dinosaur. It's beyond an antique, he says and laughs., Just Weeks From Shutting Down, McClellan's ceramics company is one of the last in East Liverpool, located in Appalachia. He has been in the pottery business for 40 years and took over this company three years ago when it was just weeks from shutting down., I've been so close to going out of business so many times, my accountant ... he just doesn't know where to send the bill sometimes, McClellan says jokingly., McClellan just completed his biggest order ever 20,000 mugs for Starbucks. The sturdy, beige mugs are metal-stamped with the coffee giant's Indivisible brand on the front. They'll sell for $10 each., Ulrich Honighausen owns Hausenware, the company that supplies the mugs, tumblers and other items that Starbucks sells. Generally, Honighausen sends his manufacturing work overseas., But he wanted to design a product that could be made in America. When these small towns and these small factories are supported by a large customer that believes in it, we can make it happen, we can bring it back, he says., At McClellan's pottery factory, it takes one week to make each mug from start to finish, and the company was able to complete the huge Starbucks order in about six weeks. An overseas factory could produce twice as many in the same time. But McClellan says Starbucks was patient., They've come out, they spent time in my factory, they've listened. And that has made me really proud to do a good job for them, he says., Doubling His Workforce, McClellan doubled his workforce for the job and so far has been able to keep them all employed churning out a few thousand mugs a month in a continuing contract with Starbucks., It's life-changing for me, he says. It's life-changing for the employees. I have employees here who have been unemployed for six months, a year, a year and a half., Smoothing the edges of the mugs after they come out of the molds, Marcie Delauder says with hardly any jobs in town, she's relieved to have this one. Having the order from a big company like Starbucks, she says, makes a big difference., This partnership is one of several Starbucks initiatives launched in the past year, including creating a small-business loan fund through the sale of wristbands in its stores., Building Customer Loyalty, It's an increasingly popular concept, says David Hessekiel, president of the Cause Marketing Forum. People will be more loyal customers if they are aware of good works by a company if price and quality are roughly equal, he says., Starbucks CEO Howard Schultz says the contract with American Mug and Stein is only the beginning., There are hundreds of East Liverpools around the country today, he says. These towns have been left for dead. And even though it's more expensive to manufacture this mug in the U.S. than it would be in China or Korea or Mexico, this is what we need to do., But McClellan says towns like his can't live only in the past. That's why he and a couple of partners just bought a shuttered pottery factory across town to outfit it with the newest equipment. Meanwhile, the original factory will continue to make mugs the old-fashioned way by hand.
American families got poorer in the first decade of the 21st century., The wealth of the median U.S. household the family at the middle of the middle class fell from $106,000 in 2001 to $77,000 in 2010., Source: Federal Reserve, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo, The fall was driven, not surprisingly, by the housing bust. Homes are the single largest asset for many families, and they represent a particularly large share of wealth for the middle class., What's more, homes tend to be highly leveraged. People borrow lots of money to buy them. That means huge gains when prices rise and massive losses when they fall., Median wealth fell for families across the income distribution. Poor, middle class, and upper-middle class families all got poorer. The only group that saw a rise in was families with incomes in the top 10 percent. Homes tend to make up a smaller part of net worth for those families., The figures are adjusted for inflation and taken from a Fed report (PDF) out today. Wealth is defined as net worth, or assets minus liabilities.
After rising sharply earlier today, European financial markets have come off their highs as investors question the logistics of the $125 billion bailout of Spanish banks and wonder ... whether Monday's gains in financial markets were nothing but a relief rally, Dow Jones Newswires reports., The Financial Times says uncertainty about how the bailout would affect Madrid's funding profile crept into [Europe's bond] market., Still, U.S. stock futures are pointing toward gains on Wall Street, Bloomberg News says, as investors speculate that the bailout of Spain's banks will help ease the euro area's debt crisis., And, this Spanish deal will at least alleviate some concern as we wait another week for the Greek election, Richard Sichel, chief investment officer at Philadelphia Trust Co., told Bloomberg., On Morning Edition, NPR's Philip Reeves said no one's in any doubt that there are more problems ahead in the eurozone as it digs out of its financial crisis., NPR's Philip Reeves, reporting on 'Morning Edition', Update at 1 p.m. ET. Bailout Boost Quickly Turns To Rout:, The Wall Street Journal writes that investors fled from Spanish government debt on Monday, an immediate rejection of the country's planned bank bailout by the constituency it most desperately needs to impress: the buyers of its own government bonds., According to the Journal, confidence in Spain is deteriorating, not rising. Behind the action is a swirl of concern about Spain, its banks and the mechanics of the bailout. ... 'The hourglass...has been turned over, but each time it's happened in Europe over the past few years there seems to be less and less sand in it,' said Peter Boockvar, equity strategist at Miller Tabak &amp; Co.
Outdoor dining spaces are filled on a warm spring day on E. 4th Street in downtown Cleveland. Like many former industrial towns, downtown Cleveland has seen a revival in the last few years to become an urban hotspot., Outdoor dining spaces are filled on a warm spring day on E. 4th Street in downtown Cleveland. Like many former industrial towns, downtown Cleveland has seen a revival in the last few years to become an urban hotspot., Almost 11 years ago, Phil Alexander opened his company, BrandMuscle, in the affluent Cleveland suburb of Beachwood., &ldquo; We can leave our apartment and walk five feet to a restaurant to get something to eat or to go shopping., - Kristen Babjack, downtown Clevelend resident, The company sells marketing software to corporate clients worldwide, and its offices have a lean, energetic vibe, with 20-somethings tossing around ideas in multiscreened meeting rooms or a comfortable coffee bar., The place is young. It's hip. And it's leaving town. A few years ago, you might've chalked that up as another economic blow to northeastern Ohio. But BrandMuscle isn't moving to a major metro area like Chicago, New York or Los Angeles, but instead about 20 miles away to downtown Cleveland., Downtown has a new energy, a new vitality; things that we really didn't see a few years ago, Alexander says., It sure doesn't sound like the place that was long the butt of jokes by late-night comics, and there are similar stories coming out of Detroit, St. Louis and Buffalo. Blue-collar towns seem to be attracting a new generation of residents looking for an affordable urban lifestyle., One of the wake-up calls for Alexander came when two of his employees asked him if he knew anyone in downtown Cleveland because they were on a waiting list for an apartment., We were actually on a waiting list for four months before we got in, says Veronica Tarasco, who now shares one of the hippest addresses in the city East 4th Street with co-worker Kristen Babjack., On most nights, that part of downtown is bustling with restaurants and live music., We can leave our apartment and walk five feet to a restaurant to get something to eat or to go shopping, Babjack says., Development of old properties in downtown Cleveland has caused an influx of young, college-educated residents., Development of old properties in downtown Cleveland has caused an influx of young, college-educated residents., A brand-new casino, just a couple blocks away, has brought even more people into the neighborhood. And Tarasco, who used to live on the East Coast, says there are plenty of other entertainment options., We have all of our arenas and sporting areas and concerts all in one pretty-much walkable area, she says. If you go to a Giants game out in New York, if you're going to the game, you're going to the game. You're not going to tailgate and then get on the train and go back into the city., An Evolving Downtown, Ari Maron is a partner in MRN Ltd. a family-owned real estate development, construction and management company. His father first started developing properties on East 4th Street 20 years ago. Back then, he says, it was better known for its wig shops, drug deals and prostitutes., The Maron family bought up much of the old, empty office space above the street and converted it to apartments. He says local developers are having a tough time keeping up with the demand., The apartments are all filled [and] there's new apartments being built every day, Maron says. I think what we're really doing is riding the wave of a national trend of people rediscovering cities., Richey Piiparinen, a researcher at Case Western Reserve University, has been tracking that trend in northeastern Ohio and nearby states., A lot of young people in Cleveland, Detroit and Pittsburgh whose parents grew up in the inner city, and whose parents left during the white flight movement they have this attraction to the roots that they never knew, Piiparinen says., Jim Russell writes an economic development blog about Rust Belt refugees who are looking to come home. He confirms that downtown Cleveland is booming. He says recent Census migration data for the area has been positive to the tune of 400 to 500 new residents., That's a pretty significant chunk of people, who tend to be young and college-educated, Russell says. That's a win., Piiparinen warns, however, that it may be just one win in a much larger battle for repopulation., This is a very complex problem, but getting an inflow of talent into a city is one way to tackle that, he says., Piiparinen says young people like Veronica Tarasco are a blank slate, not burdened with memories of all the old Cleveland jokes., My friends on the East Coast, they call names to Ohio and Cleveland and stuff, but I think it's just a bad rep that we get, she says., For Cleveland and some other hard-hit Midwestern cities, that rep is starting to change.
This is what you don't want., There's a slow-motion bank run happening in Europe, as depositors move their money from financially troubled countries like Greece and Spain to stronger countries like Germany., Banks take depositors' money and lend it out. So even a strong bank is in trouble if all the depositors suddenly decide to pull their money out. A full-blown run can sink a bank in an afternoon., Once a run starts, there are basically three ways to stop it., 1. Slow it down, In the 19th century, when bank runs were common in the U.S., banks who feared a run would have employees and relatives line up in front of the tellers and make tiny deposits or withdrawals, to pass the time until the bank closed. In extreme cases Argentina a decade ago, the U.S. during the Great Depression authorities will close banks altogether for some period of time, to prevent people from pulling their money out., The old-school method of having your friends line up obviously doesn't work in the era of Internet banking. And declaring a bank holiday and closing the banks altogether is a huge move that countries only make in moments of full-blown panic, when banks are out of money. Europe hasn't reached that point yet largely because of option two borrowing money., 2. Borrow money, People rush to withdraw their money from the bank when they're afraid the bank is about to run out of money. So if the bank can borrow a bunch of money, that usually stops the run., The European Central Bank has been lending massive amounts of money to European banks. And that's been essential so far in preventing a full-scale bank run in Europe. This weekend's agreement to bail out Spain's banks goes further. It's a huge pool of loans that should make ordinary savers confident that their bank isn't about to go under., 3. Insure peoples' deposits, Deposit insurance started in the U.S. during the Great Depression, and it persists today. That's why you see the letters FDIC on the door of every bank in the country today. It's a promise that even if the bank goes under, the government will guarantee that ordinary people get their money back. This promise alone has ended bank runs almost entirely., There is deposit insurance in Europe today. But it's issued by individual governments. So if people are worried that the government itself might run out of money, even deposit insurance may not be enough to prevent a run., The problem we have today, is that the Spanish guarantee is looked upon by Spaniards as maybe yes, maybe no, says economist Charles Wyplosz. That's not the kind of risk you like to take with your money. The problem is even more acute in Greece., One solution that's been proposed: Deposit insurance that's backed by the entire eurozone. In that case, depositors in Greek and Spanish banks would know that their savings were guaranteed not just by their own governments, but by Germany and other, more financially sound governments., Of course, this would also leave taxpayers in Germany (and every other eurozone country) on the hook for the behavior of banks throughout the continent.
The markets ended in positive territory for the fourth day in a row, capping off the best week this year., Of course, last week, was painful with big losses. The Wall Street Journal reports on the numbers:, The Dow Jones Industrial Average climbed 93.24 points, or 0.7%, to close at its daily high of 12554.20. The gain was the average's fourth-straight and capped its biggest weekly advance since December, largely thanks to a nearly 287-point rally on Wednesday on hopes of more stimulus from central banks., The Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index added 10.67 points, or 0.8%, to 1325.66. All 10 of the index's sectors rose, led by telecommunications. Wal-Mart StoresWMT +3.57% climbed 3.6%, leading the Dow higher, and hit a 12-year intraday high. The Nasdaq Composite advanced 27.40 points, or 1%, to 2858.42., The Journal says the markets were reacting to Spain, which seems to be settling, with country very likely to ask for an E.U. bailout., The AP says another factor is that the price of oil continued to drop this week and the Commerce Department said U.S. wholesale stockpiles grew 0.6 percent in April. That's twice as fast as they grew in March and a sign that businesses are ordering enough goods to lead to increased factory production and sales. Investors had been braced for more sluggish growth.
A recruiter (left) talks with a job seeker at an Oregon job fair. Job growth slowed in May, and some employers say economic uncertainty has left them reluctant to hire., A recruiter (left) talks with a job seeker at an Oregon job fair. Job growth slowed in May, and some employers say economic uncertainty has left them reluctant to hire., After adding a robust 275,000 new jobs back in January, job growth appears to be slowing. The Labor Department reports that the economy added only 69,000 jobs in May., Meanwhile, despite the worst recession in generations, there are still countless small business owners plugging away around the country, seeking to expand and hire more employees., This year we hired two more technicians, and we hope to hire one more, says Srinivas Konanki, who employs 20 people at Pipette Calibration Services, a laboratory equipment company he owns with his wife., The Konankis operate just outside Boston. Their company calibrates very precise lab tools called pipettes, which measure and dispense liquids., A pipette looks kind of like an oversized ballpoint pen, with a click button on the top. But instead of pushing out a pen tip, the button is used to dispense liquid sort of like a fancy squirt gun., The difference here is that you are actually measuring what you're squirting, Konanki says, rather than just indiscriminately shooting water. And so this [measures] very accurate volumes., Konanki is expert in the workings of pipettes. His wife, Manjula Konanki, jokes that he could talk about them for hours., But get them talking about their business, and the Konankis take a more serious tone., We, as a small business, have been very careful as to how we spend our money, Srinivas says., It's All About Optimism, For any business, job growth has a lot to do with confidence. To hire new workers, an entrepreneur needs to be optimistic that business will keep picking up., The economic environment has given business owners plenty of cause for caution. One thing troubling Srinivas is the ongoing economic turbulence in Europe. Many European countries run research labs in the Boston area, and when they make cuts, they make cuts all over, he says. And when that happens, we see our business cut down., His other big concern is potential cutbacks in U.S. government spending, particularly potential cuts to the National Institutes of Health., That's because, at the end of the year, as part of what's called sequestration, the NIH could be hit with an across-the-board 8 percent funding cut., Sequestration will only happen if Congress is unable to hit budget-cutting targets it imposed on itself through legislation last year. But a failure to reach those targets would trigger dramatic broad-based cuts like those proposed for the NIH, among numerous government agencies., Srinivas Konanki and his wife own a small laboratory device company near Boston. Concerns about the economy have left them wary of hiring new employees., Srinivas Konanki and his wife own a small laboratory device company near Boston. Concerns about the economy have left them wary of hiring new employees., Even a couple of percentage points funding [cuts] to the NIH it definitely makes a big difference to all the labs out here, Srinivas says. That will definitely affect our business., Fear Of The 'Fiscal Cliff', Betsey Stevenson, a labor economist with the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School of Business, says Srinivas' concerns are very real., She agrees that Europe could be creating a headwind on hiring in the U.S. and says many other businesses are worried about what actions Congress might take later this year as it decides whether or not to extend the Bush-era tax cuts and wrestles over unemployment benefits and required spending cuts., All these decisions facing Congress at year's end have been collectively dubbed the fiscal cliff., Congress is saying, 'We're going to make this difficult,' Stevenson says. That sends a signal to all the actors in the economy, she says, that there is potential for real damage to our economy coming in the future, and you should prepare for it today., Some Green Shoots, Despite all these unanswered questions, the U.S. is still managing to add new jobs each month., We've had slow growth, but it is growth, not losses, says David Kotok, chief economist at Cumberland Advisors, a Florida-based investment advisory firm., Kotok acknowledges that job growth has slowed since the start of the year. But while he says that's disappointing, he also sees reasons to be optimistic., The manufacturing sector is growing in the United States, Kotok says. As it does, he continues, it creates higher-paying jobs. The energy sector is also doing well, he says, with rapid growth in natural gas exploration promising to create many more well-paid work opportunities., And the third piece, Kotok says, is the gradual stabilization of housing. It's happening slowly but it's happening., If that trend continues, that eventually means more jobs for carpenters, electricians and many other people who work in related industries., Kotok, the chief investment officer for a firm that manages billions of dollars, has to put his money where his mouth is when it comes to reading the economic tea leaves. And he says he's placing his chips on a slow but continued recovery for the U.S. economy and for employment.
See related posts from this series, including What America Buys and What America Does For Work., We spend less of our money on groceries than we did 30 years ago., Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, The way we spend our grocery money has also changed., We now spend a much bigger share of our grocery money on processed foods, which includes things like frozen dinners, canned soups and snacks. We spend much less on meat, largely because meat is much cheaper than it was 30 years ago., Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, We've seen major restructuring in poultry, pork and beef industries that has allowed efficiencies and brought down the cost, Walter Falcon, a Stanford economist who's an expert on food, told me., Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR, Here's one more chart for you if you want to compare prices then and now:, Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, Credit: Lam Thuy Vo / NPR , See all of the posts in our Graphing America Series.
The NBA finals aren't the only big news in Oklahoma City., This morning, shareholders of Chesapeake Energy, the natural gas driller at the center of the nation's hydraulic fracturing controversies, are meeting in Oklahoma City, where the company is headquartered. But the buzz at this gathering won't be about fracking or basketball. It will be about Aubrey McClendon, Chesapeake's controversial CEO., Chesapeake Energy CEO Aubrey McClendon., Chesapeake Energy CEO Aubrey McClendon., For weeks, revelations have been trickling out about how McClendon's personal finances became intertwined with Chesapeake's through a complex web of loans. Thursday, Reuters added new details with a scathing profile titled The Lavish and Leveraged Life of Aubrey McClendon. (McClendon also owns a significant stake in the Oklahoma City Thunder basketball team, whose home court is known as Chesapeake Energy Arena.), Some shareholders are not sure what to be more livid about: the news about McClendon or the fact that low natural gas prices have pushed Chesapeake's stock down by 20 percent this year. McClendon agreed to relinquish his position as chairman of the board last month. But revolting shareholders, led by billionaire Carl Icahn, called for a bigger shakeup. This week, Chesapeake agreed to replace four more members of its nine-member board, but left many of the details to be worked out later., NPR's StateImpact Oklahoma is live-blogging the event, which starts at 11 a.m. ET. Here is the blog's recent explainer on Chesapeake's woes, as well as five questions that need to be answered at the meeting., (Christopher Swope is digital editorial coordinator for StateImpact, a collaboration among NPR and local public radio stations in eight pilot states to examine public policy issues in-depth.)
Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke told a congressional committee Thursday that the U.S. economy faces some significant risks, and Fed officials are still deciding what to do about it., His remarks disappointed a lot of investors who want the Fed to do something to revive growth. Bernanke spoke at a time when interest rates on government debt are hitting lows not seen since the Great Depression., Here's another sign of just how weak the U.S. economy is: The interest rate on the 10-year Treasury bond issued by the government fell last week to 1.5 percent. That means, if you bought such a bond and inflation stayed about where it is now, you wouldn't make any money., &ldquo; In real terms, if inflation over the next 10 years is more than 1.5 percent, then yes, you would end up with a little less money than if you simply hoarded cash., - John Canavan, analyst at Stone &amp; McCarthy, You would get your principal back, says John Canavan, who covers the credit markets at Stone &amp; McCarthy. In real terms, if inflation over the next 10 years is more than 1.5 percent, then yes, you would end up with a little less money than if you simply hoarded cash., And yet, people all over the world keep buying U.S. Treasury debt. The rates on Japanese and German debt are even lower. Why would anyone buy a bond with such a poor return?, For one thing, Canavan says a lot of fund managers across the globe have money to invest right now, and they're required to do something with it; they can't just hold it as cash., They have to find a place to invest, Canavan says. So for Treasurys, they're willing to accept the risk of walking away with somewhat lower real returns, in return for just getting it all back., In this highly volatile world economy with much of Europe in a recession and China slowing investors just don't know where to put their money, so they'd rather sink it in U.S. government debt. They might lose a little money there, but at least the losses won't be too great., Joseph Gagnon, senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, is a little perplexed by how risk-averse investors have become. He says there are currently a lot of good investment opportunities like corporate bonds and stocks that pay dividends. And yet, investors don't bite., American corporations are sitting on record piles of cash, just sitting in bank deposits and Treasury bills and bonds at these low rates, when they could be investing in something that would make a profit. And that's what I don't understand, Gagnon says., He says a lot of this is because of a weakness in demand. It's the same reason companies don't want to build new factories or hire people. They're worried that they won't be able to sell what they make., Gagnon says in an environment like this, something unusual happens to the markets., One of the things that really marks this crisis, and marks crises in general, is that interest rates on the safest assets decline more than other interest rates., He says investors always want a little more money the riskier an asset is. They demand a higher rate for a junk bond than a municipal bond, for instance. The difference between the two is called the spread. In fearful times like this, the spread tends to widen., Take mortgage rates: They've fallen a lot in recent years, and it's benefited the housing market. But they haven't fallen as far as Treasury bonds. Banks would rather keep their money in safe assets like Treasurys than lend it out for mortgages that could go bad., Gagnon, who used to work at the Federal Reserve, says the Fed can do things to bring mortgage rates down even further., If they do more action, that's where I would focus it on, because that spread's widened lately, and it could come down, he says., The Fed has already been doing this buying up long-term debt and making more money available to the mortgage market. But as investor confidence wanes, the Fed may decide it's time to step up its efforts.
Neal Coleman and his wife, Rachel, are both in their mid-20s and attend graduate school at Indiana University in Bloomington, Ind. They say renting makes more sense for them and their young daughter until their family is a bit more settled., Kristi Taylor can pinpoint the precise moment she let go of the dream of homeownership. It was a few months ago, as she and her husband and infant son were driving through a neighborhood of homes near their apartment in Athens, Ga., As we were passing through, I realized that I don't really look at houses like I used to, when we would point out homes and say, 'That can be ours someday,' says Taylor, who is 28. Now, she says, the idea of homeownership is so vague, it doesn't even strike me as something that's in our future., Taylor says she and her husband, Zach, 25, have lived in nine different places in the past five years, including stints back home with the parents both his and hers as they moved from place to place chasing after jobs., Homeownership among younger adults has shown a steady decline since the mid-2000s, according to the latest available Census data., Source: U.S. Census Bureau, Credit: Stephanie d'Otreppe/NPR, The Taylors aren't alone. The economic hammer has fallen especially hard on 20somethings part of the so-called Millennial Generation or Gen Y born roughly between 1975 and 1995. Plagued by high unemployment, many have had to delay careers, marriage and having children. And the idea of owning a home is more often being put off or written off entirely., In a nation where homeownership is part of the American dream, a generation of renters could alter communities where they live and redefine the idea of middle-class success., 'A Recipe For Frustration', They've seen what their parents are dealing with, what their brothers and sisters are dealing with, in terms of being saddled with home values that are less than what was paid for, says Paul Conway, a former chief of staff for the U.S. Department of Labor who is now president of Generation Opportunity, a think tank specializing in the economics of Generation Y., Sociologist Katherine Newman, who chronicles some of the struggles in her book The Accordion Family: Boomerang Kids, Anxious Parents, and the Private Toll of Global Competition, agrees with Conway that we may be witnessing the creation of a generation of renters., I'm hoping that the Millennial Generation doesn't set its sights on homeownership as a benchmark of economic stability, because it's going to be out of reach for so many of them that it will just be a recipe for frustration, she says., Homeownership among millennials has been on a gradual but steady decline, according to the latest available U.S. Census Bureau data., Does Generation Y see homeownership as the same symbol of middle-class success that was so powerful for their parents and grandparents? Click here to find out., Even with big drops in housing prices and interest rates, getting a mortgage has become a lot harder since the heady days of no income, no assets loans that fueled the housing boom of the early 2000s. Most lenders now require a rock-steady source of income and a substantial down payment before they will even look at potential borrowers. And many millennials won't be able to reach that steep threshold., The vast majority of Americans who currently rent say they hope to buy a place of their own someday, according to a recent survey released by the Woodrow Wilson International Center. But Newman fears that for many young adults, at least, perception and reality have yet to come face-to-face., The capacity to own a home will be powerfully affected by the slowdown in [their] earnings, she says, especially for entry-level workers and the crushing consequences of student loan debt., Communities Need To Prepare, Rolf Pendall, a housing expert at the Urban Institute think tank, says too much emphasis has been placed on homeownership in the past few decades, not only by individuals, but by governments and policymakers. So a shift in attitudes might be a good thing., In the short run, he says, local officials need to prepare for more renters., What communities need to do to ensure they are prepared is first to make sure that there are sites where new multifamily housing can be built, he says. And the multifamily housing that gets built needs to go in communities with high opportunity, not just communities where the schools don't perform well and where it's not safe to live., The availability or lack thereof of quality rental housing will put communities in competition with one another as a more mobile workforce is able to vote with its feet, says Conway of Generation Opportunity., A question for local government leaders, he says, is that if you have a generation that is less committed to taking a risk and buying property in that area, either because there are not jobs or because the overall national situation looks rocky, then as a local official, you absolutely have a problem for your long-term commitments, your long-term budget, your long-term obligations to such things as pension funds., Pendall thinks many or most current renters will eventually become homeowners, even if it takes them longer to make that transition than it did for their parents., There are people who will be making the transition to homeownership sooner and there are people who will be making the transition later. And some never will. That's always been the case, but that last number will probably be larger, he says., Homeownership will be out of reach for many younger adults in the U.S., according to several sociologists and housing analysts, leading to a rise in the number of renters., In theory, fewer homeowners will mean municipalities will rake in less revenue from property taxes. But Pendall believes local governments will simply adjust to make rental properties a larger share of the tax pie., And within those communities, some businesses will feel the pinch. Dan Ariely, a professor of psychology and behavioral economics at Duke University, says a wave of renters would have an obvious impact on the massive consumer industry that supports homeownership., My subjective experience is that when people buy a house, they immediately start renovating and fixing it going on Sunday afternoon to Home Depot, doing things that I think people would never do for houses that they rent, he says., But Ariely also sees a potential economic upside to a rise in renters: less of what economists call housing lock, when homeowners can't move to take a new job because they're saddled with houses they can't sell., If we all lived in a place where we rented more freely, moving from place to place would be easier, Ariely says., Flexibility Vs. Freedom, Jason Dorsey, 33, who consults and writes about Generation Y, says when you're talking about his generation, everything is taking a back seat to the limp economy., When we finally graduate from college, we're older than ever before. When we finally get married, we're older than ever before; finally have our first child, we're older. All of these things are pushing back, says Dorsey, author of My Reality Check Bounced!, Pushing things back that describes Neal Coleman and his wife, Rachel, both Indiana University graduate students in their mid-20s. For them, homeownership just doesn't make sense until careers, kids and finances are sorted out., Renting is more flexible, and we're not sure where we are going to be in a few years, Coleman says. We were also concerned about long-term financial liabilities. Grad school is transient, so we didn't want to be tied down to a house in Bloomington, Ind., if we're moving to Boston or the West Coast., Homeownership might be on the back burner, but the Colemans' views about it sound a lot like what their parents might have envisioned., You're freer when you own your own home, your own land. You're not beholden to a renter's contract, or lease, Coleman says. My feeling is that homeownership is an investment in being able to control your surroundings, to build a life for you and your family.
Does Generation Y see homeownership as the same symbol of middle-class success that was so powerful for their parents and grandparents? Or, in an era of tight credit and high unemployment, have they resigned themselves to being tenants? NPR went to where many Millennials live on the Internet Facebook and asked for some their thoughts.
Economic growth appears poised to continue at a moderate pace over coming quarters, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke is telling Congress this hour, and will be supported in part by additional accommodative monetary policy from the central bank., While there's been a slowing in job growth, Bernanke says that Fed policymakers believe household spending has been relatively well sustained and are encouraged by consumer spentiment [that is] ... up noticeably from its levels late last year., He also says the soft job growth may in part be due to unusual gains over the winter when weather was warmer than normal., But Bernanke, in testimony prepared for the Joint Economic Committee, also warns that a severe tightening of fiscal policy at the beginning of next year that is built into current law the so-called fiscal cliff would, if allowed to occur, pose a significant threat to the recovery., That's his way of saying that the deal struck by lawmakers to let the so-called Bush tax cuts expire and to have more than $100 billion in automatic spending cuts go into effect could send the economy back into recession., Fortunately, Bernanke says in his prepared remarks, avoiding the fiscal cliff and achieving long-term fiscal sustainability are fully compatible and mutually reinforcing objectives. Preventing a sudden and severe contraction in fiscal policy will support the transition back to full employment, which should aid long-term fiscal sustainability. At the same time, a credible fiscal plan to put the federal budget on a longer-run sustainable path could help keep longer-term interest rates low and improve household and business confidence, thereby supporting improved economic performance today., The chairman also promises that the Fed, as always, is prepared to take action if necessary to keep the economy moving., The hearing is being webcast here., At this hour, stock indexes are rising on Wall Street. Bernanke's testimony has been widely anticipated by investors., Update at 11:55 a.m. ET. For those who want to follow a live-blog of the chairman's appearance, The Wall Street Journal's is here., Update at 10:30 a.m. ET. For those who like word clouds, here's what the chairman's prepared testimony looks like:, A word cloud of Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke's prepared testimony to the congressional Joint Economic Committee., A word cloud of Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke's prepared testimony to the congressional Joint Economic Committee.
An elderly man walked by riot policemen guarding the Interior Ministry in Athens on Wednesday., An elderly man walked by riot policemen guarding the Interior Ministry in Athens on Wednesday., (From Athens, correspondent Joanna Kakissis tells us about the latest news regarding the troubled Greek economy.), The unemployment rate in Greece has climbed to a new record high of 21.9 percent, the country's statistical service said today. Many Greeks blame budget cuts imposed by its international lenders who include the European Union, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund for worsening the country's recession, now in its fifth year. The Organization for Economic Development and Cooperation predicts that recession will stretch well into 2013., The unemployment rate is now nearly twice the eurozone average of 11 percent. More than 100,000 companies closed last year and some companies are so short on cash, they haven't paid their employees for months, as we've previously reported., Nearly all Greeks have seen their wages cut in the last two years as part of an EU-imposed austerity program in exchange for billions in bailout loans. Greece first accepted bailout loans from the European Union, the European Central Bank and the International Monetary Fund in May 2010. A few months before, then-Prime Minister George Papandreou announced that the country was more than $400 billion in debt and that the deficit was nearly three times what the previous government, led by the center-left New Democracy, had reported. The austerity measures in exchange for the loans include wage and pension cuts and tax hikes., Papandreou tried to put the bailout loan agreement to a public vote by referendum in an attempt to get Greeks to back austerity so they could remain in the eurozone. Polls show that more than 70 percent of Greeks want to stay in the monetary union. But Greeks and European leaders reacted negatively to the referendum idea, and Papandreou was forced to resign last November. His government fell, forcing the country to early elections on May 6. Voters punished Papandreou's center-left party, PASOK, and New Democracy for supporting the harsh terms of the bailout loans. More than half of Greeks voted for anti-bailout parties., No party won enough parliamentary seats to govern, and feuding leaders failed to form a coalition government. That's why there's a repeat election on June 17., Public opinion polls show New Democracy running neck-and-neck with Syriza, the country's largest anti-bailout party though one poll, by respected pollster Public Issue, showed Syriza with a six-point lead. Syriza's telegenic young leader, Alexis Tsipras, says he rejects austerity and wants to renegotiate the bailout terms to link spending cuts to the country's growth rate but says he wants to stay in the euro. Greek people aren't asking for money. They aren't beggars, he said in a recent speech. They are asking for work and the ability to meet their living expenses., New Democracy leader Antonis Samaras says Tsipras and Syriza's policies will force Greece out of the eurozone. They are like children playing with matches in an arsenal, Samaras told the Athens Chamber of Commerce and Industry in a recent speech laying out his economic agenda. They want a return to the days of the big state., Samaras is trying to frame the election as a referendum on the euro., Joanna Kakissis, reporting for NPR
There were 377,000 first-time claims for unemployment insurance last week, down 12,000 from the week before, the Employment and Training Administration reports., But in yet another mixed signal about how the economy's doing, that welcome dip is tempered by the fact that the 4-week moving average was 377,750, an increase of 1,750 from the previous week's revised average of 376,000. Economists watch that average because it offers a slightly larger look at the trend., Also, the agency revised up the previous week's number of claims from the initial estimate of 383,000 to 389,000., Bloomberg News says the report signals limited progress in the labor market after a two-month slowdown in hiring., As we mentioned earlier, Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke this morning delivers the central bank's latest economic outlook during testimony before Congress.
